    Optical Developments for Microscale Measurement and
            Control of Temperature in Optogenetics
                                                Chang Liu



      To cite this version:
    Chang Liu. Optical Developments for Microscale Measurement and Control of Temperature in Op-
    togenetics. Optics [physics.optics]. Sorbonne Université, 2021. English. �NNT : 2021SORUS042�.
    �tel-03436023�




                                   HAL Id: tel-03436023
                 https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-03436023
                                      Submitted on 19 Nov 2021




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access               L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-     destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
entific research documents, whether they are pub-     scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
lished or not. The documents may come from            émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
teaching and research institutions in France or       recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
abroad, or from public or private research centers.   publics ou privés.


                             Sorbonne Université
                   Ecole doctorale 564 : « Physique en Île-de-France »
                          Institut de la Vision (IVISION), UMR 7210

  Optical Developments for Microscale Measurement and
               Control of Temperature in Optogenetics

                                     Par Chang F. Liu

                              Thèse de doctorat de Physique


           Dirigée par Gilles Tessier, Valentina Emiliani et Pascal Berto


                      Présentée et soutenue publiquement le 15 Avril 2021




Devant un jury composé de :
Dr. Leveque-Fort Sandrine     Directrice de recherche au CNRS     Rapportrice
Dr. Charlot Benoit            Directeur de recherche au CNRS      Rapporteur
Dr. Fragola Alexandra         Maître de conférences               Examinatrice
Dr. Quidant Romain            Professeur des universités          Examinateur
Dr. Waters Jack               Associate Investigator              Examinateur
Dr. Tessier Gilles            Professeur des universités          Directeur de thèse
Dr. Emiliani Valentina        Directrice de recherche au CNRS     Co-directrice de thèse
Dr. Berto Pascal              Maître de conférences               Encadrant de thèse


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

Développements Optiques pour la Mesure et le Contrôle Micrométrique de la Température en
Optogénétique.

La combinaison de la microscopie optique et de la génétique moléculaire - l'optogénétique - a récemment
bouleversé le domaine des neurosciences. L’utilisation d’opsines et d’indicateurs fluorescents codés
génétiquement permet désormais de contrôler et suivre optiquement l’activité neuronale de manière peu
invasive. La stimulation à 2 photons permet d’adresser individuellement plusieurs centaines de neurones
en profondeur dans le cerveau, mais la puissance laser nécessaire entraîne des effets thermiques photo-
induits qu’il est nécessaire d’évaluer précisément, puisqu’ils sont susceptibles d’altérer potentiellement
certaines fonctions neuronales.
Dans ce manuscrit, nous décrivons le développement d'une sonde thermométrique basée sur la
luminescence, permettant de mesurer in vivo la température à l'extrémité d'une fibre optique lors d’une
stimulation optogénétique à 2 photons. Cette sonde offre une sensibilité en température de 0,05 K, une
résolution temporelle de 2 ms et une résolution spatiale comparable à la taille d'un neurone (~15µm).
Elle permet ainsi d’estimer l’élévation de température induite par diverses conditions d’illumination
optogénétique. Pour évaluer l'altération de l'activité neuronale lors de telles variations thermiques, nous
avons développé une plateforme qui offre un contrôle spatial précis de la température à l'échelle du
micron. Nous démontrons que des profils de température de forme arbitraire et rapidement
reconfigurables peuvent être générés en projetant un motif d’illumination sur un ensemble homogène
de nanoparticules plasmoniques absorbantes. Enfin, nous avons utilisé ce concept de contrôle thermique
à l’échelle micrométrique pour développer des dispositifs de contrôle du front d'onde basés sur des
résistances induisant des effets thermo-optiques. Nous avons montré que des matrices de micro-
lentilles électro-thermo-optiques permettent l'imagerie calcique de l'activité de neurones à différentes
profondeurs simultanément.

Mots clés : Thermométrie par luminescence, optogénétique à deux photons, diffusion de la chaleur,
thermoplasmonique, nanoparticules, détection du front d'onde, effets thermo-optiques, imagerie
multiplan.

Optical Developments for Microscale Measurement and Control of Temperature in Optogenetics

The combination of optical microscopy and molecular genetics - optogenetics - is revolutionizing the
field of neurosciences. Genetically-encoded fluorescent indicators and opsins now allow the optical
monitoring and control of neuronal activities with minimal invasiveness. While 2-photon stimulation
can now address individually hundreds of neurons, deep inside the brain, the associated increase in laser
power leads to photo-induced thermal effects which require a careful evaluation as they can potentially
alter neural functions.

In this manuscript, we describe the development of a luminescence-based thermometric probe, that
provides in vivo temperature measurements at the end of a single optical fibre during 2-photon
optogenetic stimulation. The method provides 0.05 K temperature sensitivity, 2 ms temporal resolution,
and single-neuron-size-range spatial resolution (~15µm). This allowed us to precisely evaluate the
temperature rise induced by various optogenetic illumination conditions, deep inside tissues. To evaluate
the alteration of neural activity induced by such thermal variations, we developped a platform that
provides precise spatial control of the temperature at the microscale. Fast, accurate, and reconfigurable
temperature patterns are demonstrated over arbitrarily shaped regions by tailoring an optical pattern
projected on a homogeneous array of absorbing plasmonic nanoparticles. Finally, we utilized this
concept of microscale temperature control to develop wavefront-shaping devices based on tailored
resistors inducing thermo-optical effects. We demonstrate that tunable electro-thermo-optical micro-
lenses arrays allow the simultaneous Ca2+ imaging of neuron activities at different depths.

Keywords: Luminescence thermometry, two-photon optogenetics, heat diffusion, thermoplasmonics,
gold nanoparticles, wavefront sensing, thermo-optical effects, multiplane imaging



                                                    1


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


Summary

Summary                                                                                 2
Introduction                                                                            5
1 Two-Photon Optogenetics and Thermal Effects                                            8
  1.1.   Photostimulation of neurons                                                     9
    1.1.1.     Electrical activities in neurons                                          9
    1.1.2.     Optogenetic stimulations                                                 12
    1.1.3.     2P excitation and 2P optogenetics                                        15
    1.1.4.     Photo-induced thermal effects in the brain                               18
  1.2.   Thermal phenomena                                                              21
    1.2.1.     Fourier equation of heat diffusion                                       21
    1.2.2.     Green's function and thermal point-spread function                       22
    1.2.3.     Step response for a point source                                         24
    1.2.4.     Steady-state, point-source response                                      25
  1.3.   Photo-induced thermal effects in 2P optogenetics                               26
  1.4.   Conclusion                                                                     29
2 In vivo Temperature Measurement During Two-Photon Optogenetics                        30
  2.1.   Introduction                                                                   31
  2.2.   State of the art on temperature measuring methods                              32
    2.2.1.     Classical thermometric methods for in vivo measurement                   34
    2.2.2.     Luminescence thermometry                                                 38
  2.3.   Rare-earth particle-based thermometry on model sample                          44
    2.3.1.     Description of the setup                                                 44
    2.3.2.     Calibration of the system                                                47
    2.3.3.     Experimental results in agar and comparison with numerical simulations   48
    2.3.4.     Limit of the methods for in vivo measurement                             49
  2.4.   Development of a fibred probe for in vivo thermometry                          50
    2.4.1.     Double-clad optical fibre                                                50
    2.4.2.     The conception of the system                                             51
    2.4.3.     Fabrication of the endoscope                                             52
    2.4.4.     Calibration                                                              53
    2.4.5.     Improving the signal to noise ratio for in vivo measurement              55
  2.5.   Validation in water                                                            61
                                                  2


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    2.5.1.   Coupling to the two-photon optogenetic setup                             61
    2.5.2.   Experimental process                                                     62
    2.5.3.   Experimental conditions                                                  63
    2.5.4.   Result and comparison with the simulation                                64
  2.6.   In vivo experiments                                                          66
    2.6.1.   Simulation method for scattering medium                                  66
    2.6.2.   Experimental methods                                                     67
    2.6.3.   Results and comparison with the simulation                               69
  2.7.   Conclusion                                                                   77
3 Reconfigurable Microscale Temperature Control                                       79
  3.1.   Introduction                                                                 80
  3.2.   Plasmonic thermal effect of gold nanoparticles                               82
    3.2.1.   Modelling of light absorption by a single particle                       82
    3.2.2.   Heat diffusion for a single particle model                               84
  3.3.   Reconfigurable temperature control using light shaping                       86
    3.3.1.   Temperature shaping by gold nanoparticles assemblies                     86
    3.3.2.   Collective effects in heat diffusion                                     87
    3.3.3.   Pre-compensating the collective effect                                   88
    3.3.4.   Temperature shaping implementation                                       89
  3.4.   Experimental setups and methods                                              91
    3.4.1.   Optical path of the setup                                                91
    3.4.2.   Homogeneous surface absorber                                             92
    3.4.3.   Phase-only SLM and Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm for light shaping          94
    3.4.4.   Temperature imaging using wavefront sensing                              95
  3.5.   Results                                                                     101
    3.5.1.   Uniform temperature increase control                                    101
    3.5.2.   Temperature control with different locations and values                 102
    3.5.3.   Towards biological application: selective heating at sub-neuron scale   104
    3.5.4.   Discussion on homogeneity and reliability                               105
  3.6.   Conclusion                                                                  111
4 Tunable Thermal 'SmartLenses': Towards Multiplane Imaging of Neural Activities
                                                                           112
  4.1.   Introduction                                                                113
  4.2.   Background: 3D neuronal imaging                                             114

                                               3


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    4.2.1.   Monitoring neural activities                                 114
    4.2.2.   Sequential imaging-based techniques                          115
    4.2.3.   Parallel imaging-based techniques                            117
  4.3.   Wavefront engineering SmartLenses using thermo-optical effects   120
    4.3.1.   Overview of the SmartLens concept                            120
    4.3.2.   SmartLenses array for simultaneous multiplane imaging        121
    4.3.3.   SmartLens model and validation                               122
    4.3.4.   Dynamic focal range                                          124
  4.4.   Development of a multiplane imaging fluorescence microscope      126
    4.4.1.   Overview of the setup                                        126
    4.4.2.   Modelling and measurement of the axial range                 127
    4.4.3.   PSF characterization                                         129
  4.5.   Preliminary results on a Zebrafish                               132
  4.6.   Discussion                                                       136
  4.7.   Conclusion                                                       138
Conclusion                                                                139
Bibliography                                                              143




                                              4


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


                                     Introduction

        Advancements in optical microscopy have been pushing the frontier of understanding
living tissues for centuries. Since Antoni van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) discovered micro-
organism using his hand-made high magnification microscope based on a simple lens,
microscopy has become one of the most popular tools for exploring biological structure. Today,
with much more sophisticated optical instrumentations and advanced bioengineering
techniques, microscopes enable a broad range of studies in living tissues. For example, in one
of the fascinating research areas – brain study, genetically encoded proteins allow to optically
record and control the activity of neuronal circuits with more and more spatiotemporal
precisions and penetration depths.
       During the 200 years which followed Leeuwenhoek’s innovation, developments in
optical microscopy mainly focused on technological improvements such as the correction of
chromatic and geometrical aberrations to enhance spatial resolution. During the late 19th and
early 20th centuries, as electric lamps became available as light sources, breakthroughs in the
illumination techniques brought the wide-field imaging quality of classical optical microscopy
close to today's levels. In particular, August Köhler developed the illumination method that
bears his name in 1893. It allows the homogeneous illumination of the specimen, which highly
improves the imaging quality. Most importantly, the Köhler illuminator allowed the
development of the phase-contrast microscope decades later. In the 1930', Frits Zernike
invented the phase-contrast microscope (Nobel Prize in Physics in 1953) that measures light
interferences. Instead of relying on the intensity of light absorption or reflection, his
development gave access to an entirely new type of contrast: sensitivity to the refractive index
allowed much-improved imaging of transparent samples, like living mammalian cells.
       Later in the 20th century, the development of fluorescence microscopy brought imaging
performances to yet another level. Fluorescence provides a unique specificity by labelling
targeted biological molecules with fluorophores such as fluorescent stains, fluorescent-labelled
antibody or genetically encoded fluorescent proteins. However, it is mostly after the invention
of confocal microscopy (patented by Marvin Minsky in 1957) that fluorescence microscopy
reached its full potential. Confocal microscopy uses a scanned point-source to illuminate
fluorophores and a pinhole at the conjugated plane to remove out-of-focus signals, providing
spatial resolution and optical sectioning that was never accessible using traditional wide-field
approaches. High-resolution 3D maps of biological samples then became accessible.


                                               5


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       At the end of the last century, two-photon microscopy (or 2PM, pioneered by Winfried
Denk and James Stricker in 1990) brought 3D imaging deeper into tissues. Two-photon
scanning microscopy is intrinsically confocal but can provide optical sectioning in even thicker
samples than the confocal approach. It is based on the two-photon excitation process, as
theoretically proposed by Maria Goeppert-Mayer in 1931. It is a nonlinear excitation of
fluorescence after absorbing two photons with ~half the energy of the emission light. The
excitation probabilities depend quadratically on the light intensity; thus, the process demands
high spatial and temporal energy concentration of light, which can be efficiently performed
using femtosecond pulsed infrared laser. As a result, 2PM provides high spatial confinement in
3D, and the use of infrared light allows better penetration depths into biological tissues.
       2PM is one of the most promising methods for optical brain investigations because it is
a minimally invasive manner to achieve in vivo three-dimensional imaging with good
penetration depth and spatial resolution. In most cases, 2PM can reach imaging depths of around
500 µm within the brain, which is enough to allow the imaging of, e.g. the superficial cortical
layers of mice. The depth has been extended to more than 1mm to image the whole cortical
layer through many approaches, such as adaptive optics, higher excitation pulse energy, longer
excitation wavelengths, three-photon microscopy (3PM) or developing brighter fluorophores.1
       In the meantime, a revolutionary method called ‘Optogenetics’ emerged in
neurosciences at the beginning of this century. It uses light to control neurons that are
genetically modified to express light-sensitive ion channels or pumps. Those ion channels or
pumps are transmembrane proteins called opsins, which can permit flux of specific ions across
the membrane upon illumination at suitable wavelengths to induce electrical potential changes
on the local membrane. These potential changes can induce activation or inhibition of neurons.
Through optogenetics, one can optically control individual neurons in living tissue or even
freely moving animals. In a broader sense, optogenetics also includes techniques that optically
monitors neurons activities by the use of genetically encoded activity indicators that change
their fluorescence properties when a neuron is activated. All in all, the combination of
optogenetics reporters and actuators with advanced optical approaches enables both imaging
and manipulation of neuronal circuits, which is also today often referred to as the all-optical
recording of neuronal circuits.
       Like fluorescence microscopy, optogenetic effects can be obtained through single-
photon (1P) or two-photon (2P) absorption approaches. 1P optogenetics undergoes similar
constraints as 1P microscopy: the reduced penetration depth and lack of optical sectioning,
which can be solved, as done for imaging, by performing 2P optogenetics. More specifically,

                                                6


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

the optical sectioning of 2P in combination with 3D laser beam scanning or holographic light
shaping techniques, enables in-depth single or multi-neuron activation with single-cell or sub-
cell resolution opening the way to a precise optical manipulation of neuronal circuits.
       However, as we will see, the need to reach a high number of neurons for in-depth
activation requires amplified powerful lasers. This brings forward a major concern related to
possible photodamage effects. For optical configurations using parallel illumination which, as
we will see, deliver low excitation density light on large surfaces, the main sources of
photodamages are photoinduced thermal effects.
       In this thesis, I will therefore specifically focus on the theoretical and experimental
investigation of the temperature rise associated with 2P optogenetic stimulation.
       In Chapter 1, I will introduce the technique of 2P optogenetics and the mathematical
models to predict the temperature rise induced during a 2P optogenetic experiment. The model
is based on the Fourier’s heat diffusion equation solved using the Green’s functions formalism.
       In Chapter 2, I will present a fibre-based luminescence thermometry technique, that I
developed to measure in vivo the temperature rises induced during 2P optogenetic experiments
and to validate the prediction of the model. I will present several experimental results in vitro
and in living mice and compare them to the simulations.
       In Chapter 3, I will introduce a reconfigurable temperature control technique as a
possible tool to help control temperature rises and study their influences. The method is based
on the plasmonic thermal effect of gold nanoparticle assemblies and realised by light shaping
illumination. The temperature shaping ability is validated by wavefront thermal sensing.
Through proof-of-principle experiments, we show the potential of the technique for the study
of living cell thermal responses. During the work of Chapter 3, I studied microscale thermal
control and thermo-optical effects, which brought me to another - related- horizon: thermally
tunable optics.
       In Chapter 4, I will demonstrate a micro-device that can modify optical wavefronts
through electrically generated heat in a thermo-optical medium. Using one of the functions of
this device, a new 3D imaging method is developed. The thermally controlled tunable lens array
is used to focus on different planes during a single wide-field image acquisition. Preliminary
experiments of simultaneous multiplane imaging of neuron activities were carried out in
zebrafish larvae combined with calcium imaging.




                                               7


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


Chapter 1
Two-Photon Optogenetics and Thermal Effects

Summary

  1.1.    Photostimulation of neurons                                                        9
     1.1.1.       Electrical activities in neurons                                           9
     1.1.2.       Optogenetic stimulations                                                  12
     1.1.3.       2P excitation and 2P optogenetics                                         15
     1.1.4.       Photo-induced thermal effects in the brain                                18
  1.2.    Thermal phenomena                                                                 21
     1.2.1.       Fourier equation of heat diffusion                                        21
     1.2.2.       Green's function and thermal point-spread function                        22
     1.2.3.       Step response for a point source                                          24
     1.2.4.       Steady-state, point-source response                                       25
  1.3.    Photo-induced thermal effects in 2P optogenetics                                  26
  1.4.    Conclusion                                                                        29


         The brain is one of our body's most fascinating organs. For decades, more and more
advances technologies have been applied to investigate it. Nowadays, to better understand its
complex mechanisms, research increasingly focuses on the cellular, even subcellular level–
neurons, synapses, and the networks they compose. Photonic methods have brought important
new perspectives to this subject, and light is increasingly used for manipulating and observing
brain circuits.




                                                     8


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


1.1. Photostimulation of neurons

    1.1.1. Electrical activities in neurons

        The mammalian brain is composed of billions of neurons interconnected into circuits by
trillions of synapses2,3. Neurons include various cell types responsible for different functions
like reception, processing, and transmission of signals4. They communicate through electrical
or chemical signals and form complex neural systems. To decode neuronal networks, one
should answer system-level questions, like the role of neurons in a neural circuit or behaviour,
as well as molecular- and cellular-level questions, like how membrane proteins like ion
channels and other molecules give each neuron its physiological characteristics. Perturbing one
element in a neural circuit is a strategy often used in the domain of neuroscience, e.g. for
describing the neural system anatomically or for functional dissection of individual cell types
and their synaptic connections. This is usually realised by manipulation of neural electrical
activity, such as to activate (or inhibit) certain neurons for a “gain of function” (or “loss of
function”) experiment while using electrophysiology tools to listen to the changes in electrical
signals3,5.
        To manipulate neural electrical activity (activate or inhibit), it is essential to understand
a key phenomenon: the action potentials (AP). AP is the sudden transient potential change on
the plasma membrane that propagates along the axon to the synapse, transmitting signals
downstream to directly connected neurons6. In all animal cells, a difference in electrical charge
between the intracellular and extracellular sides of the plasma membrane creates an electrical
potential. A neuron membrane at resting potential is about –70 mV (more negative inside than
outside). By opening and closing specific membrane ion-channel proteins (who are permeable
to specific ions), neurons undergo controlled changes in their membrane potentials. While the
inside potential becomes more positive than the resting potential, we call it the depolarisation
process; while it becomes more negative than the resting potential, we call it
hyperpolarisation. The action potential is a cycle of membrane depolarisation,
hyperpolarisation and returning to the resting state.
-   When a neuron is at the resting state, the resting potential (inside negative) across the plasma
    membrane is maintained by an electro-chemical equilibrium of several ions, mainly K+, Na+
    and Cl-, each of different permeability through the membrane. For each ion, its equilibrium
    is determined by the differences in ion concentrations and electrical potentials between the
    inside and outside of the membrane. K+ is the most permeable as there are many open resting

                                                 9


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    K+ channels at the resting state. Let us take K+ as an example to explain the process: resting
    K+ channels are always open and allow only K+ to pass, shown in Figure 1.1(a). The
    concentration of K+ is much higher inside animal cells than in extracellular fluid; due to this
    concentration gradient, K+ ions flow out of the cell through the resting K+ channels and
    leave an excess negative charge on the cytosolic face. Meanwhile, this negative charge
    balance the K+ efflux. Such an equilibrium and negative potential are maintained because
    of Na+/K+ active pumping (by an enzyme called Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase, taking K+ in and Na+ out)
    to keep the ions concentration.
-   When a region of the plasma membrane is depolarised slightly, voltage-gated Na+
    channels open for a short period (~1ms) and allow the influx of Na+ ions (see Figure 1.1(b)).
    This influx results from two forces driving in the same direction: the concentration gradient
    of Na+ ions (lower in the cell) and the resting membrane potential (negative in the cytosol
    side). The influx causes further depolarisation of the region, which spreads along the
    membrane surface and continue to depolarise adjacent regions of the membrane, opening
    even more voltage-gated Na+ channels. As a result, explosive entry of Na+ ions is completed
    within a fraction of a millisecond, causing sudden and transient depolarisation, the action
    potential. The voltage-gated Na+ channels close after this short period, entering a refractory
    period and cannot be reopened as long as the membrane stays depolarised.




Figure 1.1 Ion channels in neuronal plasma membranes. Each type of channel protein has a
specific function in the electrical activity of neurons. (a) Resting K+ channels are responsible
for generating the resting potential across the membrane. (b) Voltage-gated channels are
responsible for propagating action potentials along the axonal membrane. (c, d) Two types of
ion channels in dendrites and cell bodies are responsible for generating electric signals in
postsynaptic cells. (Two triangles on the right stand for the concentration gradient of Na+ and
K+). (Adapted from ref 7)



                                                10


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

-   Following the opening and closing of voltage-gated Na+ channels, voltage-gated K+
    channels open (with a millisecond or so delay after the initial depolarisation), which causes
    an increased efflux of K+ from the cytosol. It repolarises the membrane to its resting
    potential. Actually, before returning to resting value, the membrane experience a brief
    instant of hyperpolarisation, when the potential is more negative than the resting potential.
    The voltage-gated K+ channels remain open until the membrane potential returns an inside
    negative value.
-   Eventually, the voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels are all closed, and the membrane returns
    to the resting state. This cycle lasts 1 – 2 ms and can happen hundreds of times a second.
    Around the peak of an action potential, the membrane depolarisation can depolarise
    downstream segments of the membrane to re-initiate the cycle, thus ensuring the
    propagation of action potential without diminution.7
       Naturally, the initial trigger that evokes an action potential in the postsynaptic neuron
can be neurotransmitters or electrical current at the synapse. For example, in the case of
chemical synapses, in Figure 1.1(c,d), the ligand-gated ion channel opens while binding a
specific extracellular neurotransmitter; the signal-gated channel opens in response to
intracellular signals induced by binding of the neurotransmitter to a separate receptor protein
(not shown). Both of them are responsible for generating an electrical signal in the postsynaptic
neuron. In another case, in electrical synapses, electrical current from a presynaptic neuron can
evoke depolarisations directly on the postsynaptic one. However, initial depolarisation does not
always result in action potential; it can result in subthreshold depolarisations when the action
potential threshold is not reached8,9. For simplicity, inhibition in neuron synaptic connections
is not discussed here.
       To artificially generate action potential in vivo, the most used method is electrical
stimulation: an electrode is placed near neurons of interest (extracellular stimulation) or inside
a neuron of interest (intracellular stimulation), and an electrical current is applied at fixed
frequency and time. It elicits action potential by changing the extracellular environments or
intracellular potential such that voltage-gated Na+ channels open. Although electrical
stimulation protocols have been developed and refined in the last century to produce reliable
activation and minimise neural tissue damage, it still has some main limitations. As shown in
Figure 1.2(a), extracellular electrical stimulation non-specifically affects all cell types near the
electrode, inducing side effect on adjacent neurons and resulting in a large population of
neurons excited without cellular resolution or cell specificity. Intracellular stimulation provides
single-cell specificity, but only very few electrodes can be inserted in the sample and targeting

                                                11


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

a large population is not possible. Also, most of the time, the electrode stimulation approach is
not reproducible. When an experiment requires several days of operation, it is hard to go back
to the same cell or group of neurons once taking out the electrodes.




Figure 1.2 (a) Electrical stimulation non-specifically affects all cell types near the electrode,
causing side effects on adjacent neuron; (b) Genetically targetable optogenetic constructs
enable more precise stimulation of specified neural subtypes intermingled with nontargeted
neurons. (Adapted from ref 10)

       In the last decade, a new method called optogenetic stimulation has emerged, as shown
in Figure 1.2(b), allowing the use of light to stimulate and probe neuron functions without
inserting a stimulation electrode, with high specificity and reproducibility, which has provided
abundant advantages over traditional electrode-based methods.

   1.1.2. Optogenetic stimulations

       Optogenetics is based on the optical stimulation of photosensitive membrane-bound ion
channels and pumps that are genetically encoded in activable neurons. Its mechanism was first
discovered in microbial organisms in which bacteriorhodopsin acts as a light-activated ion
pump 11. Further research on this mechanism and its variants found similar membrane-bound
proteins that permit ions flux across the membrane upon stimulation at a suitable wavelength,
known as channelrhodopsins12,13 and halorhodopsins14. Two variations of channelrhodopsins
were subsequently selected for their ease of expression, conductance and photosensitivity:
Channelrhodopsin-1 and Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2). In 2005, for the first time, the genetic
code for ChR2 was introduced and expressed in mammalian neurons, allowing to reliably and


                                               12


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

precisely control action potentials generation15. Since then, this method has drawn increasing
interest in neuroscience research.
       As shown in Figure 1.3, under illumination at around 470 nm, ChR2 opsins on the neural
membrane open and allow the passive entry of cations into the cell (mostly Na+ and very low
levels of Ca2+)16. This results in the depolarisation of the local membrane, where they are
expressed and activated. Sufficiently high depolarisation could further open voltage-gated Na+
channels and possibly trigger the generation of an action potential. Other types of opsins can
cause inhibition, like halorhodopsin (NpHR), which hyperpolarises membranes by actively
pumping Cl– ions into cells in response to yellow light with peak absorption at 570 nm. In the
last years, the palette of optogenetics actuators that work with different wavelengths or provide
different functions has significantly expanded3.




Figure 1.3 Schematic of channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2) and the halorhodopsin (NpHR) pump.
Illuminated with blue light (activation maximum ~470 nm), ChR2 allows the entry of cations
(mostly Na+ and very low levels of Ca2+) into the cell. NpHR is activated by yellow light
(activation maximum ~580 nm, and allows the entry of Cl– anions. (Adapted from ref 16)

       Compared to the classical electrical stimulation method, the main advantages of
optogenetics are that: it can be non-invasive; it enables exciting only a specific cell type and
subcellular domain using genetically encoded and targetable probes2.
       Combined with single-photon (1P), wide-field illumination (as shown in Figure 1.4(a))
or fibre induced illumination, optogenetic neuronal targeting has already shown enormous
potential in neuroscience. It has enabled the optical control of entire neuronal networks15,17–19
and disentangled their role in controlling specific behaviours20–22. In these studies, cellular
specificity relied exclusively on genetic targeting strategies that enable the expression of opsins
in specific cell types. This, however, offers a limited understanding of brain function since

                                                13


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

neurons belonging to the same cell type and brain region may present diverse response
patterning23–25. In order to understand the fine-scale organisation of the brain, e.g. the number
of neurons required to trigger a certain behaviour or the importance of a certain node in neural
circuits over others, the spatial range of light-based investigation needs to be scaled-down from
genetically targeted neuronal population to individual neurons. This has encouraged researchers
to develop a variety of light-targeting strategies26,27 that enables arbitrarily controlling the
spatial distribution of light into the sample and selectively target defined neurons, subsets of
neurons, within the opsin-positive population, as shown in Figure 1.4(b). Light-targeting is
typically achieved following two classes of approaches: either by scanning micro-scale
Gaussian spots to serially activate targets, or by modulating light intensity and/or phase to
obtain arbitrarily defined patterns of illumination to parallelly activate targets; sometimes, a
combination of both approaches is used28.




Figure 1.4 Single-photon optical approaches for optogenetic stimulation. (a) The genetically
targeted, opsin-expressing neurons are activated via wide-field illumination. (b) Targeted
investigations by selective activation of a specific pool of neurons via specific optical targeting.
(Adapted from ref 28)

       A critical challenge of using light to stimulate neurons is that it requires to overcome
tissue scattering to access neurons deep in the brain. A further challenge is related to the
necessity to highly confine the illumination and reach a high 3D spatial resolution, which is
essential to mimic natural and realistic neural activity patterns accurately28. Replacing single-
photon (1P) excitation with two-photon (2P) excitation is currently one of the most promising
approaches29 to solve these issues.




                                                14


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   1.1.3. 2P excitation and 2P optogenetics

       Single-photon excitation is based on a linear photon absorption process. An atom or a
molecule is excited by the absorption of one photon. As shown in Figure 1.5 (one-photon), a
photon excites a ground-state electron to a higher energy level. The 1P excitation probability
depends linearly on light intensity. It follows that, as shown in Figure 1.6(a), for a focused
beam, 1P absorption also occurs out of focus.




                Figure 1.5 Energy-level diagram of one-photon and two-photon
                                excitations. (Adapted from ref 30)

       In 2-photon absorption processes, two photons with half the energy of those used in 1P
processes must reach the molecule within an ultrashort time window limited by the intermediate
virtual state (~1fs, as shown by a dashed line in Figure 1.5 ) 31,32 in order to promote the electron
to the excited state. Such events have reasonable probabilities of occurring only if the photon
density is high enough, both in space (focusing) and time (high-intensity beams and/or short
and intense pulses). Therefore, 2P excitation is typically provided via focused, high-energy
lasers with short pulse duration, which provide a high density of photons in the excitation area.
During the 2P process, the absorption probability is quadratically dependent on the light
intensity33–35. As illustrated in Figure 1.6 (adapted from ref35), this quadratic dependency
intrinsically provides high spatial confinement in the z-direction (and, more marginally, in the
x and y directions) compared to 1P process33.




                                                 15


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 1.6 Localisation of single-photon and two-photon excitation. (a) Single-photon
excitation of fluorescein by focused 488nm wavelength light (NA = 0.16). (b) Two-photon
excitation with focused femtosecond pulses of 960nm light (NA = 0.16). (Adapted from ref 35)

       Besides, 2P excitation has the important advantage of using longer-wavelength photons,
usually in the infrared, which are much less scattered than shorter-wavelength blue photons, as
the scattering coefficient decreases with the wavelength (see Figure 1.8(b)). 2P excitation is,
therefore, able to address neurons at a greater depth than 1P excitation.
       With higher spatial resolution and penetration depth, 2P excitation provides
optogenetics with potentials of single-neuron precision, selective multi-neuron targeting, and
in-depth neuron circuit investigation. However, considering the low conductance of some opsin
(for ChR2: ~80 femtosiemens)36, in order to guarantee reliable neuron activation and elicit
action potentials, which require strong depolarisation, a large number of photoactivated ion
channels are necessary37. A tightly 2P focused beam is not able, in most of the cases, to open a
sufficient number of channels within its two-photon focal volume (~2-5 µm3); increasing
excitation density would not help either, as saturation of excited ChR2 channels is quickly
reached owing to the high two-photon absorption cross-section of ChR2 (~260 Goeppert-Mayer
units at 920 nm) and the long lifetime of the conducting excited states (~10 ms)37. An elegant
solution that consists of illuminating the entire cell body rather than a single point using
computer-generated holography (CGH), was first proposed in 2008 in 1P and in 2P (see ref38,39).
As shown in Figure 1.7, an adapted pattern is projected into the sample using a spatial light
modulator (SLM). This pattern illuminates the entire cell bodies of selected neurons and
maximises the fraction of the cell membrane stimulated. All opsins in the cell are thus
simultaneously opened, and depolarisation can reach the voltage threshold to action potential


                                               16


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

generation. In order to improve illumination axial resolution (<6 μm) and propagation through
scattering tissue, CGH can be combined with temporal focusing37,40. That is achieved by using
a dispersive optical setup to modulate the temporal profile of the pulse, such that the pulse is
stretched away from the objective focal plane, compressed as it travels toward it and stretched
again beyond it. Temporally focused CGH illumination has allowed generating action
potentials with millisecond temporal resolution37,41 and sub-millisecond temporal onset
precision42,43. The principal alternative to this parallel illumination method is the scanning
method, in which a focused beam is scanned sequentially over the entire soma of one or several
neurons in order to increase the number of accessible channels and integrate over time the
current generated in different locations of the cell28.




Figure 1.7 CGH setup. Principle of 2P parallel illumination of several neurons simultaneously
(at the same plane). An illumination intensity pattern in FFP is here applied using a phase-only
liquid crystal spatial light modulator (LC-SLM) placed in a conjugated plane (BFP*) of the
BFP, based on the shape and location of neurons of interest. The whole cell bodies are
photoactivated at the same time, recruiting as many opsins as possible. (BFP: back focal plane;
FFP: front focal plane; BFP/FFP* conjugated back/front focal plane). (Adapted from ref 28,44)

       By combining the above strategies with high-energy amplified lasers (with up to 10W
output) and highly sensitive opsins, it is now possible to target hundreds of cells within mm3-
size illumination volume simultaneously. In the next paragraphs, we will discuss the possible
sources of photodamage induced using 2P parallel illumination.


                                                17


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   1.1.4. Photoinduced thermal effects in the brain

    1.1.4.1. Light absorption processes

       In the brain, several components are responsible for light absorption. Water is the most
absorbing element, followed by blood components, while absorption by proteins (including
opsins or fluorescent proteins) usually remains negligible. The absorption spectrum specific to
each of these components is shown in Figure 1.8(a). To reduce thermal effects, the excitation
wavelength should then clearly be chosen to minimise absorption. In living tissues, the
attenuation of light as it propagates is caused by absorption and also by scattering. The "optical
window" usually refers to the 600 – 1200 nm wavelength range, where this attenuation caused
by both absorption and scattering is minimal.




Figure 1.8 (a) Light absorption spectra of several important compounds in biological tissues.
HbO2 for oxygenated and Hb for deoxygenated haemoglobin. (b) Reduced scattering
coefficients of different biological tissues. Wavelengths cover the UV, visible, NIR-I and NIR-
II windows (violet, blue, green and red shaded regions, respectively). (Adapted from ref 45)

       Different photodamages can appear depending on the medium, and the characteristics
of the illumination source, as shown in Figure 1.9. Those damages are distinguished by different
pathways of absorption and dissipation. It should be clarified that the absorption process that
we are discussing here is not the 1P or 2P absorption of optogenetic or fluorescent actuators,
but of the biological tissue itself. For low irradiance (below 106 W/cm2)46, and long
illuminations (millisecond scale), after excitation, the molecules can go back to their ground
state in a non-radiative manner, transferring this absorbed energy in the form of local heating,


                                                18


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

resulting primarily in a local temperature rise. At longer illumination times, other mechanisms
can cause local chemical perturbations, as is the case for de-excitations that involve
dissociation, changes in the redox state of the absorbing molecules, or transfer of energy to a
dioxygen molecule to form reactive oxygen species. For higher irradiance, above the 106 W/cm2
thresholds, more severe effects appear, even within a short illumination time (femtoseconds to
nanoseconds). When the irradiance is high enough, the ionisation of molecules occurs as
additional photons are absorbed. Released electrons can also absorb photons and collide with
other molecules, generating even more free electrons. This phenomenon is known as the inverse
bremsstrahlung avalanche effect47. This avalanche effect can lead to a low-density plasma
which can cause photochemical damage. Even higher irradiances can induce mechanical
damages as cells receive supersonic shock waves caused by the formation of bubbles followed
by their explosion, breaking the tissue structure and killing the cell.




Figure 1.9 Photodamages in biological tissues depending on the irradiance and exposure time
of illumination. (Adapted from ref 44,46)

       In a typical 2P optogenetics experiment using parallel illumination, the conditions used
to elicit an AP typically involve: 3-20 ms illumination pulses with 10-40 mW mean power over
around 100µm² cell surface, corresponding to a mean irradiance of ~104 W/cm2. Typical laser
sources provide 250 fs pulses with a 500 kHz repetition rate. Thus, the peak irradiance reaches
~1010 W/cm2. As indicated in Figure 1.9, these values correspond to a range dominated by

                                                19


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

photothermal effects and, therefore, by a linear dependence on the average power density of the
laser.

    1.1.4.2. Brain sensitivity to thermal perturbations




     Figure 1.10 Brain tissue responses to temperature increases. (Adapted from ref 44,48)

         Different levels of temperature rise in the brain could result in different kind of
perturbations, as shown in Figure 1.10. Relatively small temperature rises (less than 2K) induce
modulation in neuron behaviours such as the form of action potentials49, the firing rate50,51, and
the channel conductance52–54 or fluctuation of synaptic responses55,56. Higher temperature rise
(3-4K) can cause severe damages such as proteins denaturation, cell structure changes and
eventually cell apoptosis57,58. Even higher temperature rise will damage the tissue through
swelling, coagulation and inflammatory responses59,60.
         These considerations lead us to conclude that the main sources of possible photodamage
in 2P optogenetics experiments are damages related to local temperature rise. It highlights the
importance for a theoretical model able to predict these effects, as discussed in the next
paragraph.




                                               20


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


1.2. Thermal phenomena

       In this section, we introduce a model able to describe photon-induced thermal effects in
the brain. Photon-induced temperature rises in tissues are the consequences of i) light absorption
and conversion into heat followed by ii) heat diffusion in the surrounding media.
       Using Fourier’s equation for heat diffusion, we calculate the temperature distribution
using a Green's function-based strategy.

   1.2.1. Fourier equation of heat diffusion

       The Fourier equation describes heat diffusion in a homogeneous media as61:

                               𝜕𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡)                   𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡)
                                         − 𝐷𝛻 2 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) =                                    Equation 1.1
                                 𝜕𝑡                         𝜌𝐶

Here 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) is the induced temperature rise due to the absorption of 𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡), 𝑟⃗ the spatial
coordinate in 3D, t the time, 𝑄 the absorbed power in each unit of volume [W.m-3]; the medium
is characterised by its thermal diffusivity D [m2s-1], its mass density ρ [kg.m-3] and its thermal
capacity C [J.kg-1.K-1].
       In living tissue, metabolic processes can contribute as a positive (heating due to
metabolic process) 𝑞𝑚 or negative (cooling due to blood perfusion) 𝑞𝑝 term to the temperature,
in processes often described using the Pennes bio-heat equation62. Adding these to the Fourier
equation (Equation 1.1), we have:

                           𝜕𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡)                   𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) 𝑞𝑚 − 𝑞𝑝
                                     − 𝐷𝛻 2 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) =         +                             Equation 1.2
                             𝜕𝑡                         𝜌𝐶        𝜌𝐶


The sink term 𝑞𝑝 can be expressed as 𝑞𝑝 = 𝜌𝑏 𝐶𝑏 𝑤𝑏 ((𝑇0 + 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡)) − 𝑇𝑏 ) with T0 the initial
temperature of the tissue, 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) the induced temperature rise, and where ρb, Cb, wb and Tb
respectively stand for the mass density, the thermal conductivity, the flow and the temperature
of the blood. In physiological condition and while 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) = 0 , 𝑞𝑚 and 𝑞𝑝 are equal,
maintaining the tissue temperature at a constant value. Using typical values48,51 of ρb, Cb and
                                                                      𝑞𝑚 −𝑞𝑝
wb, and considering a tissue temperature rise of 1 K, the term                  is estimated to be roughly63
                                                                        𝜌𝐶

                                                                      𝑄(𝑟⃗,𝑡)
-9.10-3 K.s-1. Under typical 2P photostimulation conditions,           𝜌𝐶
                                                                                is of the order of 2.103K.s-1

(for an illumination spot of 12µm diameter, 10mW illumination power inside the spot and

                                                   21


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

absorption coefficient of tissue 𝛼 = 0.06 mm-1, the absorbed power is 𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) ~ 6.10-6 mW/µm3).
                                                                             𝑞𝑚 −𝑞𝑝
While it could be crucial in some cases, the metabolic contribution                   to local temperature
                                                                                𝜌𝐶

changes can clearly be neglected compared to 2-photon-stimulation-induced heating, as
discussed in a previously published article63.
       Thus, heat source and sink contributions from metabolic and blood perfusion are omitted
in our analysis. The tissue is considered as a homogeneous medium with a fixed optical
absorption coefficient (𝛼=0.06 mm-1 for brain grey matter (Yaroslavsky et al. 2002)) and
thermal properties (very similar to those of water). Equation 1.1 will now be solved in the case
of either a transient or steady-state heat source.

   1.2.2. Green's function and thermal point-spread function

       To solve the Fourier Equation 1.1, we use a Green's function-based approach. Green’s
function is obtained for a unit source term 𝛿(𝑟⃗ − 𝑟⃗0 )𝛿(𝑡 − 𝑡0 ):

                           𝜕𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡)
                                     − 𝐷𝛻 2 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) = 𝛿(𝑟⃗ − 𝑟⃗0 )𝛿(𝑡 − 𝑡0 )               Equation 1.3
                             𝜕𝑡

The solution gives the form64:


                                              1                  (𝑟⃗ − 𝑟⃗0 )2
               𝐺(𝑟⃗, 𝑟⃗0 , 𝑡, 𝑡0 ) =                     𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−               )             Equation 1.4
                                       (4𝜋𝐷(𝑡 − 𝑡0 ))3/2        4𝐷(𝑡 − 𝑡0 )


and the temperature 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) is obtained by the convolution of the Green’s function and the
                                                      𝑄(𝑟⃗,𝑡)
actual spatiotemporal distributed source term               :
                                                       𝜌𝐶



                                                          𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡)
                                  𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) = 𝐺(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) ∗                                     Equation 1.5
                                                           𝜌𝐶


       For a unit source term at 𝑟⃗0 = 0 and 𝑡0 =0:


                                          1              𝑟2
                            𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) =           𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−     )                               Equation 1.6
                                       (4𝜋𝐷𝑡)3/2        4𝐷𝑡


We can plot it in Figure 1.11 at various multiples of an arbitrary duration  against the
normalised radial distance to the point source.

                                                      22


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 1.11 Radial distribution of the temperature response to a pulsed point-source excitation.
Both coordinates are normalised in arbitrary units.

       Green's function 𝐺𝑇 (𝑟, 𝑡) for heat diffusion can therefore be written as:

                                            1              𝑟2
                        𝐺𝑇 (𝑟, 𝑡) =                𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−     )                      Equation 1.7
                                         (4𝜋𝐷𝑡)𝑛/2        4𝐷𝑡


where 𝑛 = 1, 2 or 3, and 𝑟 = |𝑥|, √𝑥 2 + 𝑦 2 or √𝑥 2 + 𝑦 2 + 𝑧 2 respectively for 1D, 2D or 3D
heat diffusion.
       In the presence of a source term 𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) which has a structure in both space and time,
the temperature solution 𝑇(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) to Equation 1.1 can then be obtained by a convolution over
                             𝑄(𝑟⃗,𝑡)
space and time of the term             with Green's function 𝐺𝑇 (𝑟, 𝑡) as expressed in Equation 1.7.
                              𝜌𝐶

In our case, the spatial and temporal dependencies in 𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) can be separated, to write
𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) = 𝛤(𝑟⃗)𝛱(𝑡)𝑄, and the spatial distribution 𝛤(𝑟⃗) and time dependence 𝛱(𝑡) can be
treated separately.




                                                   23


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   1.2.3. Step response for a point source

       An interesting case is that of a point-like heat source 𝛤(𝑟⃗) = 𝛿(𝑟) applied from t=0
onwards, e.g. a focused laser beam being turned on at t=0. In this case, 𝛱(𝑡) = 𝐻(𝑡), with H(t)
the Heaviside step function, and:

                             𝑄                   𝑄 𝑡
                   𝑇(𝑟, 𝑡) =   𝐺 (𝑟, 𝑡) ∗ 𝐻(𝑡) =   ∫ 𝐺 (𝑟, 𝑡 ′ )𝑑𝑡 ′              Equation 1.8
                             𝜌𝐶 𝑇                𝜌𝐶 0 𝑇


This yields:
                                                         𝑟
                                                 𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑐 (      )
                                            𝑄           √4𝐷𝑡                      Equation 1.9
                                𝑇(𝑟, 𝑡) =
                                            𝜌𝐶        4𝜋𝐷𝑟


where 𝑟 = √𝑥 2 + 𝑦 2 + 𝑧 2 in the 3D problem. For an arbitrary distance r0 to the heat source,
the time dependence of this temperature solution is plotted in arbitrary units in Figure 1.12. As
expected, temperature rise strongly slows down and tends towards a steady-state (time
independent) value:




                  Figure 1.12 Transient temperature response to a point-like
                      step heat source at various distances from the source



                                                 24


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   1.2.4. Steady-state, point-source response

       For a continuous point source 𝛤(𝑟⃗) = 𝛿(𝑟), 𝛱(𝑡) = 1, we obtain:
                                                  𝑟
                                         𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑐 (      )
                               𝑄                 √4𝐷𝑡 = 𝑄 1                      Equation 1.10
                        𝑇(𝑟) =    𝑙𝑖𝑚
                               𝜌𝐶 𝑡→∞          4𝜋𝐷𝑟     𝜌𝐶 4𝜋𝐷𝑟

Therefore, the radial temperature dependence at a distance r from a point source is simply, to a
constant factor, a 1/r function, a familiar result in thermal sciences. For e.g. 𝑄 = 4𝜋𝐷𝜌𝐶, this
function is plotted in Figure 1.13.




             Figure 1.13 - Temperature profile around a continuous point source.

       The thermal diffusivity is defined as 𝐷 = 𝜅/𝜌𝐶, where 𝜅 is the thermal conductivity
(𝑊𝑚−1 𝐾 −1). We define here the thermal Green’s function in steady-state:

                                                1
                                      𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 =                                     Equation 1.11
                                               4𝜋𝜅𝑟


For a steady-state system, the temperature distribution is thus the convolution of the heat
sources spatial distribution with the thermal Green’s function in steady-state 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 . This result
will be used in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4.

                                                25


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


1.3. Photo-induced thermal effects in 2P optogenetics

         As described in section 1.1, 2P optogenetic photostimulation induces local thermal
effects, which can now be described quantitively using the formalism introduced in Section 1.2.
From the discussion of Section 1.2.2, the temperature response can be modelled as the
convolution of the thermal Green's function 𝐺𝑇 (𝑟, 𝑡) with the spatiotemporal distribution of the
heat source 𝑄(𝑟⃗, 𝑡) = 𝛤(𝑟⃗)𝛱(𝑡)𝑄. In our case, which is weak absorption (linear coefficient:
𝛼), the heat source distribution 𝑄 is proportional to the light intensity distribution 𝐼: 𝑄 = 𝛼𝐼.
The heat source is then defined linearly by the spatiotemporal distribution of light intensity.
         For holographic illumination, the description of the light source 𝛤(𝑟⃗) must take into
account the shape and position of the holographic spots, but also the distortions induced by light
propagation in the brain, which is a strongly scattering tissue. In the holographic process, a
given phase profile is applied on an SLM and projected on the sample to produce constructive
interference in the regions which must be illuminated, and destructive interference everywhere
else. This complex phase profile is typically determined using an iterative procedure called
Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm38,65, and the projected optical field is written:
                                    𝐸𝑆𝐿𝑀 (𝑟, 𝑡) = 𝐴(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑒 𝑖𝜑(𝑥,𝑦)
with 𝐴 the amplitude distribution sent to the SLM and 𝜑 the phase introduced by the SLM.
         In a homogeneous transparent medium, the propagation of this wave to any sample
plane can be simulated using the angular spectrum method66. To model the scattering medium,
we have used the so-called “Beam Propagation Method”67–69. This method consists in
propagating the field through the medium in a series of finite discreet “steps” and applying a
random thin phase mask at each of these steps. The statistics of this random distortion was
based on optical measurements of the attenuation in acute brain slices of various
thicknesses41,70. Using these parameters, we were able to realistically model the 3D distribution
of light in the mouse brain, as shown in Figure 1.14(b). A full description of this procedure, as
well as the detailed code and validation of its outcome by comparison to experiments, is shown
in Annex 1 to this manuscript.
         Precisely, Figure 1.14 shows the modelling of the temperature rise induced by 100 two-
photon     optogenetic   holographic   spots    focused   at   various   3D    positions   inside
300µm×300µm×300µm volume. These 100 spots were chosen using a 3D image of a mouse
brain and arbitrarily selecting target neurons. In Figure 1.14(c), heat diffusion in the volume of
the brain is clearly visible, and collective contributions from these heat sources lead to higher


                                               26


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

temperature rises at the centre of the volume where the 100 spots are focused, and lower
temperatures near the edges of this region63.




Figure 1.14 Simulated temperature rise produced by multiple holographic spots with power
and duration conditions typically used for in vivo action potential stimulation in mice. (a) 3D
view of an in vivo two-photon fluorescence stack of the 2/3 layer in the mouse visual cortex.
The sample is labelled with GFP, and the position of 100 holographic spots is marked in red.
(b) 3D spatial distribution of irradiance produced by these 100 holographic spots (each spot is
12 µm in diameter and receives 0.1mW/µm2 at =1030nm). (c) 3D spatial distribution of the
temperature rise produced by these holographic spots. Scale bar: 100µm. (Adapted from ref 63)

       Using this model, the predicted temperature rises under the illumination conditions
typically used to evoke an action potential, i.e. P = 11mW, t = 3ms, with a spot diameter of
12µm, is shown in Figure 1.15(a,b), revealing a maximum temperature rise of about 0.3 K
which, as expected, varies linearly with the optical power (Figure 1.15(b)) and increases for
longer pulses (Figure 1.15(c)). When trains of pulses are applied (10 pulses in (Figure 1.15(c)),
the accumulation of heat, which does not entirely dissipate between one pulse and the next, is
visible as an increase in the temperature baseline, the more important the longer is the
illumination time.




                                                27


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 1.15 Spatial-temporal evolution of the temperature rise generated by a speckled
holographic illumination pattern and holographic simulations with varying parameters. (a) 2D
spatial distribution of the temperature (normalised) after 0.04ms (time step used in simulation),
0.1 ms, 1.5 ms and 3 ms of illumination. Scale bar = 10 µm. (b, c, d) Calculated temperature
in the centre of the spot for a =1030 nm, 12 µm diameter holographic spot in vivo; (b)
temperature for various optical powers and an illumination time 3 ms; (c) Temperature for
variations of illumination durations, with an optical power 11 mW; (d) Same peak power 11mW
and various pulse durations, and a 100 Hz repetition frequency.




                                               28


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


1.4. Conclusion

       In this chapter, we focused on the importance of the heating induced under a typical
optogenetic experiment.
       In order to predict the magnitude of this effect, we have described a theoretical model
previously developed by the Emiliani’s lab and have shown how the model enables to predict
the spatial and temporal distribution of the temperature rise induced by the illumination of
single or multiple targets under the illumination conditions typically used in a 2P optogenetic
experiment.
       In the next chapter, we will describe the experiments to validate this model in vitro using
Er/Yb co-doped glass particles embedded in an agar gel and in vivo mice brain using a novel
temperature endoscope (Chapter 2). Later on, in Chapter 3, we will present the development of
a reconfigurable microscale temperature control technique that is adaptable to study the thermal
response of cells, and show proof of principle experiments. Supported by the same thermal
diffusion theory, we introduce in Chapter 4 the application of a thermal lens device applied to
allow simultaneous, multiplane neuron imaging.




                                               29


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


Chapter 2
In vivo Temperature Measurement During Two-Photon
Optogenetics

Summary

  2.1.   Introduction                                                                 31
  2.2.   State of the art on temperature measuring methods                            32
    2.2.1.   Classical thermometric methods for in vivo measurement                   34
    2.2.2.   Luminescence thermometry                                                 38
  2.3.   Rare-earth particle-based thermometry on model sample                        44
    2.3.1.   Description of the setup                                                 44
    2.3.2.   Calibration of the system                                                47
    2.3.3.   Experimental results in agar and comparison with numerical simulations   48
    2.3.4.   Limit of the methods for in vivo measurement                             49
  2.4.   Development of a fibred probe for in vivo thermometry                        50
    2.4.1.   Double-clad optical fibre                                                50
    2.4.2.   The conception of the system                                             51
    2.4.3.   Fabrication of the endoscope                                             52
    2.4.4.   Calibration                                                              53
    2.4.5.   Improving the signal to noise ratio for in vivo measurement              55
  2.5.   Validation in water                                                          61
    2.5.1.   Coupling to the two-photon optogenetic setup                             61
    2.5.2.   Experimental process                                                     62
    2.5.3.   Experimental conditions                                                  63
    2.5.4.   Result and comparison with the simulation                                64
  2.6.   In vivo experiments                                                          66
    2.6.1.   Simulation method for scattering medium                                  66
    2.6.2.   Experimental methods                                                     67
    2.6.3.   Results and comparison with the simulation                               69
  2.7.   Conclusion                                                                   77



                                             30


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




2.1. Introduction

       As shown in the previous chapter, the expected simulated temperature rise caused by 2P
optogenetic stimulation is of the order of few Kelvins, with a millisecond rising time. To
measure the temperature changes with this degree of precision, we propose to use rare-earth-
doped glass particles whose photoluminescence spectrum contains two bands that are thermally
coupled. We use these particles to validate the model first in vitro and then in vivo. To this end,
we will present a new optical thermometry method which we will call "thermal endoscope",
since it uses optical fibre, although it doesn't allow imaging. This system has sub-0.1 K
temperature sensitivity, millisecond temporal resolution and single neuron (10–20
micrometres) spatial resolution and enables temperature measurement in vivo mice brain. In
this chapter, we will first describe several classical thermometry methods and then introduce
luminescence thermometry. We will focus on the application of luminescence thermometry for
2P optogenetics temperature evaluation. We will show the result for in vitro and in vivo
temperature measurements under 2P optogenetics holographic spot stimulation and compare it
with the simulation model.




                                                31


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


2.2. State of the art on temperature measuring methods

       There is an extensive range of techniques to measure temperature, based on diverse
phenomena such as thermal expansion, thermoelectricity, temperature-dependent variation of
electrical conductors' resistance, fluorescence and its spectral characteristics71. Depending on
their degree of invasiveness, they can be divided into 3 categories:
1) Invasive. The measuring device is in direct contact with the sample. Techniques mainly
   include thermal expansion (gas, liquid, solid) devices72–77, thermoelectric devices and
   thermocouples78,79, electrical resistance devices    80
                                                             , semiconductor devices81, fibre optics
   probes82,83 and capacitance thermometers84. Note that invasiveness can be defined as
   mechanical, but also thermal (i.e. measurement disrupts the temperature of the sample).
2) Semi-invasive. The sample of interest is treated in a way that enables remote observation
   using contrast agents or transducers. Techniques include thermographic phosphors
   (quantum dots85,86, organics dyes87–90, metal nanoparticles91, Ln3+ based phosphors92–95,
   thermoresponsive polymers96), thermochromic liquid crystals97,98, heat-sensitive paints99.
3) Non-invasive. The temperature of the sample is observed remotely, with or without
   additional stimulation of the sample. Those technologies mainly include optical related
   methods- infrared thermography100–102, refractive index-based methods103,104, absorption
   and emission spectroscopy105,106, spontaneous Rayleigh and Raman scattering107–110,
   Coherent anti-stokes Raman scattering111, degenerate four-wave mixing112 and laser-
   induced fluorescence thermometry113.

       All those techniques have their strengths and drawbacks, as summarised in Figure 2.1.
A few of them are practical for in vivo temperature measurement and have the potential to fulfil
the requirement of sub-0.1 K temperature accuracy, millisecond temporal resolution and tens
of µm spatial resolution at the same time. Thermocouples generally have fast temporal
responses and high sensitivity. They are probably one of the most commonly applied
                                        114
temperature measurement techniques            , although they are invasive mechanically (usually
hundreds of µm diameter) and thermally (metallic material). Infrared thermometry is another
                                                                                115
method widely used to study the photoinduced temperature rise in tissue               , since it has the
advantage of being non-invasive and entirely passive (no external stimulation needed).
Thermographic fluorophore-based methods are relatively new approaches. They are performant
in terms of temperature sensitivity, and many types of fluorophores are available for various



                                                  32


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

applications and temperature ranges. They have been widely applied to perform nanoscale
thermometry in biological samples116,117.




   Figure 2.1 Guide to temperature measurement technique identification(Red rectangle:
       invasive, blue rectangle: semi-invasive, green: non-invasive.) (Adapted from 71)


                                             33


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       In the following state-of-the-art section, we focus on three methods, which have
received the most attention for temperature measurement in biological samples: thermocouple,
infrared thermographic camera, and luminescence thermometry.

   2.2.1. Classical thermometric methods for in vivo measurement

    2.2.1.1. Thermocouple

       The thermocouple is a widely used temperature sensor based on the Seebeck effect 71,118:
a temperature gradience across the conductor can build up an electrical potential (dV). It is
mathematically expressed using the Seebeck coefficient of the conductor S(T):


                                         dV = 𝑆(𝑇)𝑑𝑇                                   Equation 2.1

       In order to measure this potential, as shown in Figure 2.2, two conductors of different
materials are put in contact to form a junction (at sensed temperature, Tsense). A temperature-
dependent potential appears between point a and b if the conductors have different Seebeck
coefficients (SA and SB). Other junctions are necessarily formed (at Tref, with metal C, and Tmeter
is the temperature of the voltmeter), but their effects will be cancelled out in the calculation
(Equation 2.2). While Tref and the Seebeck coefficient curves SA(T) - SB(T) are often already
known, one can deduce the temperature Tsense from the following equation:


                  𝑇𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟                  𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓                    𝑇𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒
          V= ∫             𝑆𝐶 (𝑇)𝑑𝑇 + ∫           𝑆𝐵 (𝑇)𝑑𝑇 + ∫             𝑆𝐴 (𝑇)𝑑𝑇
                 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓                    𝑇𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒                  𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓
                                                                                      Equation 2.2
                                 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓                   𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓
                            +∫          𝑆𝐶 (𝑇)𝑑𝑇 = ∫            (𝑆𝐵 (𝑇) − 𝑆𝐴 (𝑇))𝑑𝑇
                               𝑇𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑟                  𝑇𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑒




Figure 2.2 Illustration of standard thermocouple measurement configuration. The measured
voltage can be used to calculate Tsense, given that Tref is known.


                                                      34


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       This common technique has been applied in several studies to evaluate temperature rise
during optogenetics experiments114,119,120. Figure 2.3 shows an example of using a
thermocouple to measure temperature rise induced by fibre illumination in tissue, the distance
between the fibre and thermocouple is around 1mm114. Although the proposed problems in
those studies are solved, there are still a few limits and drawbacks to thermocouples:
-   The size of most commercial thermocouples is too large. Needle-like thermocouples have
    diameters of typically hundreds of microns, making them physically invasive in the context
    of brain studies (e.g. typical diameter used for in vivo applications: 330 µm114, 220 µm119
    and 500 µm120). Even for the smallest commercial thermocouple available121, the diameter
    is 80µm, far from the 10 to 20 µm which are necessary to evaluate the temperature evolution
    caused by a ~10 µm optogenetics holographic spot in brain tissues. There are very recent
    publications on the fabrication of microscale thermocouples using lithography that reduced
    massively the size122,123, but no in vivo application has been demonstrated so far.
-   Due to the high thermal conductivity of most metals(or semiconductors), thermocouples
    are thermally invasive: by "draining" heat from the investigated region, they are strongly
    perturbative to the temperature measurement—for example, the J-type thermocouple
    consists of constantan/iron pair with thermal conductivities of 23 W.mK-1 and 80 W.mK-1
    respectively124, while that for water is only 0.53 W.mK-1. Heat will therefore diffuse
    preferentially along the thermocouple. In the context of microscale, small and fast
    temperature variation, this will potentially affect the temperature measurement.




           Figure 2.3 Example of temperature measurement using a thermocouple
            during fibre guided 1P optogenetic stimulation. (Adapted from ref 114)




                                               35


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    2.2.1.2. Infrared thermographic camera

       Infrared imaging (Figure 2.4) is a non-invasive method based on Max Planck's
blackbody radiation principle. By measuring and analysing the thermal radiation of a target
object, one can deduce the temperature of the object surface.




         Figure 2.4 Radiation received by an infrared camera. (Adapted from ref125)

       Although a correction factor called emissivity ( here) should be taken into account, the
thermal radiation spontaneously emitted by most ordinary objects (including biological objects)
can be approximated as blackbody radiation, which has a specific spectrum of wavelengths that
depends on the temperature of the body, as shown in Figure 2.5. Around the temperature of
living tissues (30-40 °C), the blackbody emission is essentially in the infrared, with a maximum
wavelength given by Wien's law125 (max=b/T, with b=2898 µm.K), at λ=9.3 µm, as shown in
Figure 2.5. An infrared camera sensitive to this wavelength range (usually in the 3-5 µm or 8-
12 µm wavelength ranges) can detect the emitted thermal radiation to deduce temperature
images using the following relation:



                                                     4                     4
                         4    𝑊𝑡𝑜𝑡 − (1 − 𝜀) ∙ 𝜏 ∙ 𝜎𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑙 − (1 − 𝜏) ∙ 𝜎 ∙ 𝑇𝑎𝑡𝑚
                 𝑇𝑜𝑏𝑗   = √                                                      Equation 2.3
                                                  𝜀∙𝜏∙𝜎
where 𝑊𝑡𝑜𝑡 is the total radiation received by the camera, 𝜎 is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant
(𝜎=5.67×10-8 W/m²∙K4). Other parameters must ideally be taken into account: 𝜀 the emissivity
of the object, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑙 the reflected temperature, 𝜏 the transmittance of the atmosphere and 𝑇𝑎𝑡𝑚
the temperature of the atmosphere. In practice,  and  are often simply approximated to 1
(which is reasonable in living tissue and in the transmission bands of the atmosphere,
respectively), and reflections are experimentally minimised rather than corrected.


                                                36


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.5 Planck's Law: electromagnetic radiation emitted by a blackbody in thermal
equilibrium at a given temperature. Radiation emitted by objects with high temperature is
mostly in the middle wave infrared (a), while for objects with low temperature, it is mostly the
in long-wave infrared range(b). (Adapted from ref125)

       However, while water vapour absorption can be minimised and neglected in the
appropriate bands, liquid water is significantly absorbing in the infrared (absorption coefficient
being 104 to 106 m-1 in this range). For this reason, the collected infrared radiation only comes
from the topmost surface (typ. a few micrometres deep) and carries little information on the
temperature of buried structures. Although limited to exposed surface areas, infrared
thermography has been applied to studying temperature rise in optogenetic experiments115, as
shown in Figure 2.6. However, measuring temperature changes several hundreds of microns
under the brain surface is clearly impossible with an infrared camera.




                                               37


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.6 Example of using an infrared camera to measure temperature rise on the brain
surface induced by fibre guided optogenetic stimulation. (a) Schematic representation of the
setup. (b) Close-up view of the craniotomy; fibre is placed on top of the exposed surface of the
brain, and the illuminated spot is imaged with the IR-camera; (c) Thermography image of the
craniotomy during laser illumination. (d) Example of a temperature-time trace with
illumination pulses. (Adapted from ref115)

   2.2.2. Luminescence thermometry

    2.2.2.1. General overview

       Luminescence is the light emission from excited electronic states of a given atom or
molecule populated by an external excitation source, which can be an electric source
(electroluminescence),    a   chemical    source     (chemiluminescence),    a   thermal    source
(thermoluminescence) or a light source (photoluminescence)126. The properties of emitted
photons are related to the properties and population of electronic states that are involved in this
emission process, which depend on the local environment (local field, etc.) of the molecule and
particularly on its temperature. Luminescence spectrometry can thus be used to access the
temperature of the emitter environment. In the last decade, numerous thermometry methods
based on photoluminescence have been proposed.



                                                38


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




    Figure 2.7 Possible effects of temperature on luminescence spectra. (Adapted from ref126)

        As schematically shown in Figure 2.7, a broad range of features of the emitted light can
be affected by temperature, and luminescence thermometry methods are thus classified into the
following sub-classes126:
•    Spectral Luminescence Thermometry is based on the analysis of the spectral position of the
     emission lines, which typically changes when the energy difference between two electronic
     levels is affected by temperature. Based on this phenomenon, the temperature can be
     deduced from spectral shifts.
•    Band-Shape Luminescence Thermometry. When the electronic states of emitting lines are
     close enough in energy, they can be thermally coupled. Temperature variation can then
     change the electron repartition and the relative intensity between those coupled spectral
     lines. By measuring the intensity ratio between different lines, one can then deduce the
     temperature.
•    Bandwidth Luminescence Thermometry. The temperature increase induces a homogeneous
     line broadening. Under appropriate conditions, a measurement of this broadening can
     provide temperature measurements.




                                               39


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


•   Intensity Luminescence Thermometry. Photon emission rates change with temperature,
    usually through thermal activation and/ or luminescence quenching or the increase of non-
    radiative decay probabilities.
•   Polarization Luminescence Thermometry. Molecules illuminated by a linearly polarised
    light re-emit a luminescence signal that is partially polarised along the same direction.
    However, the orientation of the molecular dipoles is quickly randomised through thermal
    agitation, and this orientation is quickly lost, so that partially polarised luminescence is
    emitted, with a ratio that is temperature-dependent127.
•   Lifetime Luminescence Thermometry. Luminescence lifetime  is the time that emitted
    luminescence intensity decays to 1/e of its initial value. The variation of this lifetime with
    temperature can be described through the Mott-Seitz model 𝜏(𝑇) = 1⁄(𝐴𝑅 + 𝐴𝑁𝑅 (𝑇)) ,
    where 𝐴𝑅 the radiative transition rate (independent of temperature) and 𝐴𝑁𝑅 (𝑇) the non-
                                                                                               Δ𝐸
    radiative transition rate described by a Boltzmann law128 𝐴𝑁𝑅 (𝑇) = 𝐴𝑁𝑅 (0). exp (− 𝑘𝑇 ).

    Time-resolved luminescence measurement can thus make lifetime thermometry possible.
       Among those phenomena, we chose to use 'Band-Shape Luminescence Thermometry',
which has proved its robustness and versatility in several applications where its relative
insensitivity to the excitation intensity proved an important advantage93,129,130. Using rare-earth-
doped materials provide the additional advantages of good photon yields and robustness against
photodamage. Furthermore, the method requires less sophisticated instrumentation than life-
time based temperature methods.

    2.2.2.2. Rare-earth doped material and upconversion

       Lanthanide elements (also called rare-earth elements) have an electronic configuration
that gives them interesting spectroscopic properties. As shown in Figure 2.8, rare earth elements
have an incomplete electronic shell (4f2-14) shielded from external fields by two complete shells
(5s25p6). Due to this partial screening of the 4f electrons, the energy level scheme of a particular
rare-earth ion remains practically unchanged from host to host. Therefore, electrons from the
4f shell can emit luminescence that is only weakly sensitive to the external host environment.
For this reason, the position of the atom in the crystal structure has little influence. Among all
optically active ions, lanthanides ions are distinguished for the following important
characteristics131:




                                                40


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


•   the emission and absorption wavelengths are relatively insensitive to host material of ions;
•   long lifetime of metastable states (from hundreds of µs to several ms);
•   high quantum efficiency.




        Figure 2.8 Electronic configuration of rare earth materials. (Adapted from 131)

       In addition to these properties, rare earth ions possess the interesting capacity to emit a
luminescent photon at higher energy than the absorbed photons, which is called "upconversion".
During this process, several photons are absorbed one after another to emit one luminescent
photon. As opposed to two-photon absorption, in which photons must arrive quasi-
simultaneously, this phenomenon relies on electronic energy states with long enough lifetimes
that act as intermediaries for upconversion absorption. Thus, there is no need for high photon
densities to increase the probability of simultaneous photon arrival. A classical, inexpensive
infrared laser can meet the requirement, and no ultrafast laser (which is hardly compatible with
optical fibres) is required.
       Furthermore, a combination of different rare earth elements in the same crystalline
matrix, or co-doping, can considerably increase the luminescence efficiency for the same
pumping power. This relies on the difference in absorption cross-section for different dopants.
In this thesis, we chose to use a co-doped Erbium/Ytterbium material. Ytterbium, which

                                               41


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

exhibits a large absorption cross-section at wavelengths around 976 nm, is used as an efficient
intermediary for excitation132. Excited Ytterbium then transfers its energy to Erbium by various
processes, and predominantly by resonant energy transfer. This interaction will allow the
transfer of energy from one system to another, as illustrated in Figure 2.9(c). Since those two
elements are co-located in the co-doped host material, energy from the 4F5/2 level of Ytterbium
can be transferred to the 4I11/2 level of Erbium. Erbium at the level 4I11/2 can then absorb another
photon and be brought efficiently to the state 4F7/2.
          Another possible mechanism consists of two successive absorption processes of 976nm
photons by the same electron, bringing the Erbium ion from its ground state 4I15/2 to state 4I11/2
with the first absorption and then to 4F7/2 with the second absorption.
          Afterwards, non-radiative de-excitation brings the ion from the 4F7/2 level to states 2H11/2,
4
    S3/2 and 4F9/2, from which ions can deexcite to the ground state and emit photons at 525 nm,
550 nm and 660 nm.




Figure 2.9 Energy band diagram and optical transitions of Er3+ ions for different excitation
wavelengths; (a) λexc = 450nm; (b) λexc = 685 nm; and (c) λexc = 975 nm, with Ytterbium used
as excitation intermediary. (Adapted from ref 93)
                                                   42


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    2.2.2.3. Principle of luminescence thermometry

       In Erbium, as can be seen in Figure 2.9, the 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 states are energetically very
close to each other. As the energy difference of these two states is weak (~800cm-1)133, the
population distribution of the two states can be described by the Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics.
They are in thermal equilibrium, and the luminescence intensities from the two excited states
(λ = 525 nm and λ = 550 nm) respect the following relation130:

                                    𝐼525         −𝛥𝐸
                                         ∝ exp (     )                             Equation 2.4
                                    𝐼550          𝑘𝑇
where I525 and I550 are the integrated luminescence intensities at 525 nm and 550 nm, E is the
energy gap between the 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 states, k the Boltzmann constant, and T the temperature
                                                                      𝐼                𝐵
(in Kelvins) of the emitting ions. This expression can be rewritten as 𝐼525 = A. exp (− 𝑇 ), where
                                                                       550

A and B are constants. If A and B are known, the measurement of the luminescence intensities
I525 and I550 provides a measurement of the temperature of the Erbium ions.
       Er-Yb Co-doped crystals or glasses are therefore excellent thermometers, in which Yb
is used as an intermediary for efficient excitation and, after energy transfer, the luminescence
of Er is used as a sensitive and quantitative temperature reporter.
       These ions have been used in various matrices over the last decade. In particular, the
first reported use of NaYF4:Er3+,Yb3+ nanoparticles as thermal nanoprobes in liquids and cells
by measuring the spectrum of the temperature-sensitive green luminescence emission was in
2010 (ref133).




                                               43


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


2.3. Rare-earth particle-based thermometry on model sample

       In this section, our goal is to assess the potential of luminescence thermometry (based
on Er/Yb co-doped glass particle) for measuring the temperature rise induced by a transient
holographic spot that mimics an optogenetic stimulation. In this first step, we carried out the
validation of the luminescent-based thermometer in a model system instead of real biological
conditions, in which the Er/Yb Co-doped glass particle is at a fixed position, in a transparent
medium with known thermal properties, as described in Figure 2.10. In addition to validating
the principle and performances of the thermometric concept, this simple setting is particularly
adapted to numerical modelling of the temperature field since the optical and thermal properties
of the medium surrounding the particle are homogeneous and isotropic. Er/Yb co-doped glass
particles (50% GeO2 – 40% PbO – 10% PbF2 – 1%ErF3 – 1%YbF3) have been synthesised at
Chimie ParisTech, in the laboratory of Michel Mortier and Patrick Gredin. In the following, we
will refer to Er/Yb co-doped glass particle as "Er/Yb particles" for the sake of simplicity.

   2.3.1. Description of the setup

       As a transparent medium, we used the water/agar gel (mass fraction of agar: 0.5%).
Since the agar concentration is very low, the optical scattering is negligible, the refractive index
is almost the same as water134, and the thermal properties are similar to those of water (at 20°C,
thermal conductivity for 0.5% mass fraction of agar being 0.588 W·m−1·K−1, and for water
being 0.601 W·m−1·K−1)135. The gel is rigid enough to avoid any convection, sedimentation or
Brownian motion, so that a ~10-µm-diameter Er/Yb particle can be kept in the middle of the
medium, as shown in Figure 2.11(b). We chose the probe size to obtain sufficient temperature
sensitivity and short integration times (4ms); therefore, we measured the temperature rise
averaged on a size comparable to the cell soma. The whole sample is surrounded laterally by
two layers of silicone rubber isolator (0.5 mm deep each, Invitrogen P24743) and sandwiched
between two coverslips (No. 1, 140 µm thickness).
       First, to calibrate the temperature probe, we use a PID-controlled electrical foil heater
integrated with a thermistor (Thorlabs, HT10K) to maintain the global temperature in the agar-
gel chamber, as shown in Figure 2.11(c). It applies a constant (or slowly varying) temperature
to the entire sample. A thin thermocouple (Omega, HYP0-33-1-T-G-60-SMP-M),
implemented in the sample close to the probe, is used to precisely measure the reference
temperature induced by electrical heating.


                                                44


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.10 Illustration of the experimental setup for temperature measurement on a model
sample using Er/Yb particle. 2P scanning imaging path (red) is used to localise and
continuously illuminate the Er/Yb particle (green); the fibre collimator collects luminescence
light (green path). The holographic photostimulation (orange path) generates a heat-inducing
spot of 15-µm-diameter beside the Er/Yb probe. The wide-field imaging path is not shown here.
The thermocouple and PID controlled heating element are for calibration purpose.




Figure 2.11 Closer view of the sample. (a) Widefield image (xy-plane) of the Er/Yb particle
near the holographic spot (illustrative). Scale bar:10µm. (b) Cartoon in xz-plane of the probe
and the holographic spot. (c) The agar gel chamber and the calibration setups (thermocouple,
resistive foil heater, thermistor).

                                             45


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

         Secondly, we measure the temperature rise due to the holographic photostimulation
spot, using the calibrated Er/Yb probe. The measurements were performed on a system built
around a commercial upright microscope (Zeiss, Axio Examiner Z1) coupled with two pulsed
infrared excitation paths through a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS), shown in Figure 2.10.
         A 1030 nm laser (GOJI, Amplitude Systemes, operated at a repetition rate of 10 MHZ
and laser pulse width of ~250 fs) was used to create a heat-inducing holographic spot at
specific positions near the probe. The laser beam was triggered by an acousto-optic modulator
(MQ40-A2, AA Optoelectronic) and expanded to illuminate the screen of the spatial light
modulator (LCOS-SLM X10468-07 Hamamatsu Photonics). The SLM plane was then
projected by two telescopes (equivalent magnification of 0.5) on the back aperture of a 20x-1.0
NA water immersion Zeiss objective. To maximize output power, the back aperture was
underfilled, resulting in the generation of a holographic beam of ~0.5 effective NA. The SLM
was addressed with phase profile calculated via Gerchberg-Saxton based algorithm, in order to
generate a 15 mm diameter holographic circular spot over different positions of the sample. The
zero and higher diffraction orders (>1) were blocked before entering the microscope. The
position-dependent diffraction efficiency of the SLM136 was compensated by adjusting the total
laser power for each lateral displacement (Figure 2.13(d)) of the spot. The power (P=500mW)
and the shape of the heat-inducing spot (15-µm-diameter) were kept identical at each position.
         The same objective was used to excite the Er/Yb particle with a 980 nm laser (Mai Tai-
Deep See, Spectra Physics, repetition rate 80 MHz, pulse width around 100 fs). The laser beam,
modulated by a Pockel cell (350-80, Conoptics), entered a commercial 2P scanning head (VIVO
2-PHOTON, 3i-Intelligent Imaging Innovations) and was focused on the Er/Yb probe by
adjusting the position of two galvanometric mirrors. It illuminated the Er/Yb particle with a
constant average intensity, delivering a constant optical excitation. The absorption of this laser
by the medium or the particle generates some spurious heating, but since this heating is
continuous, the temperature reaches a new equilibrium T0 after few seconds. This is not
detrimental to measure additive transient temperature changes induced by the optogenetic pulse
laser.
         During the temperature measurement, luminescence light was collected from the top of
the sample through the same objective. It was then collected by the confocal entrance of a fibre
spectrometer (Avantes, AvaSpec-ULS2048L-EVO). Acquisitions are taken every 4 ms, with
an integration time of 2 ms. The position of the glass probe was identified through DIC imaging
on a CMOS camera (Thorlabs DCC 1545M) (not shown).


                                               46


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   2.3.2. Calibration of the system

       From Equation 2.4, the relation between the luminescence spectrum and temperature
can be written as:


                                    1    1       1 𝐼525
                                      = − . ln (        )                             Equation 2.5
                                    𝑇    𝐵      𝐴 𝐼550
Here, the coefficients A and B strongly depend on the nature of the Er/Yb particle and its
doping, but also on its local environment. They need to be determined by calibration whenever
one of these parameters changes, but can be considered constant otherwise. Once A and B are
known, the absolute temperature can be deduced quantitatively from measurements of I525/I550.
       To achieve this calibration, the sample (agar gel chamber) is heated on the PID-
controlled heating element (as shown in Figure 2.10 and Figure 2.11(c)). The probe is
illuminated constantly, and its luminescence spectrum is measured to derive I525/I550 (the
integration range for I525 and I550 are respectively Band 1: 510.3 - 529.1 nm and Band 2: 535.0
– 575.9 nm, shown in (a)) for various temperature values T, as measured by the thermocouple.
These measurements were achieved at thermal equilibrium, between 296.6 K and 309.8 K, and
repeated five times to increase the reliability of the calibration. A linear fit on ln(I525/I550) as a
function of 1/T, shown in (b), yields A = 4.67 and B = 1195.9K with good precision (coefficient
of determination R2= 0.9362).




Figure 2.12 (a) Change of luminescence spectrum shape caused by temperature rise and (b)
calibration of luminescence thermo-spectroscopy




                                                 47


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   2.3.3. Experimental results in agar and comparison with numerical simulations

       Using the calibrated Er/Yb probe and the holographic photostimulation system (Figure
2.10 and Figure 2.11(b)), we measure the temperature rise induced by a 15-µm-diameter
holographic spot (λ=1030nm, P=500mW). In Figure 2.13(a), a single 500 ms laser stimulation
pulse with an average power of 500mW (after objective) was applied to the agar-based sample,
focused on the holographic spot located 30 µm away from the probe, both at a depth of 150 µm
inside the agar gel. The temperature was deduced from the emission band ratio using Equation
2.5 and the calibration coefficients (A and B) given above. Figure 2.13(b,c) show temperature
rises induced by two trains of pulses with 50ms-pulse duration and repetition rate of 2Hz and
10 Hz, respectively, using the same peak power and laser-probe distance (30 µm). In Figure
2.13(d), to validate the ability to measure spatial heat distribution, we took the peak temperature
rise values at different distances by laterally moving the spot away from the probe; illumination
conditions were the same as in Figure 2.13(a).




Figure 2.13 Temperature rise induced by a 15-mm-diameter holographic spot (experimental
results and simulation). a-c): Time-traces for different pulse durations (a: 500ms, b, c: 50ms)
and repetition frequencies (a: single spot, b: 2Hz, c: 10Hz). d): Peak temperature rises as a
                                                48


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

function of the distance X between the Er/Yb particle and the holographic spot using the same
illumination conditions as in (a). (The red lines represent the excitation pulses; blue trace and
point: measurement; black trace: simulation.)

       These experimental results were used to validate the model described in Section 1.2 and
1.3 (also in ref63). Here, the absorption coefficient137 (α = 0.06mm-1) and thermal properties of
the agar gel were assumed to have the same values as those of water 138,139. As can be seen in
Figure 2.13, our experimental results all fit perfectly with the prediction using no free
parameters.
       These results show that the use of Er/Yb co-doped particles enables minimally invasive
optical temperature measurement with micrometre spatial resolution and millisecond temporal
resolution, and also enables to validate the theoretical model previously described. However,
in these experiments, to increase the signal to noise ratio, we used much higher power and
longer pulse durations than the ones used in typical conditions of in vivo 2P optogenetics
experiments; and we used a phantom sample whose optical properties might differ from the one
of a living mouse brain. As a next step, we then developed an experimental strategy to measure
the temperature rise induced at the exact same conditions used for in vivo 2P optogenetics.

   2.3.4. Limit of the methods for in vivo measurement

       Using the previously introduced setup to measure the temperature rise under in vivo
conditions requires focusing the excitation light (to pump the probe) and collecting the evoked
luminescence for spectral analysis using an Er/Yb particle placed deep in a living (scattering)
brain, and finding the exact position of the probe with respect to the optogenetic excitation spot.
Moreover, as the tissue moves during in vivo experiments, one has to find a strategy to maintain
both the probe and its illumination stable during the experiment. To solve all these challenges,
we designed a thermometer endoscope where we fixed the probe at the extremity of an optical
fibre and used the fibre both to transmit the excitation and to collect the luminescence, ensuring
mechanical and optical stability. Optical glass fibres can be thin enough (up to 125µm diameter)
to be compatible with in vivo use, and glass has a thermal conductivity (1 W.m-1K-1) which is
much closer to that of water (0.6 W.m-1.K-1) than metals (typically 200 to 400 W.m-1.K-1). This
will ensure minimal thermal invasiveness, i.e., opposite to the case of a thermocouple, glass
fibres will not drain heat out of the investigated region.
        In the next section, we will describe the system in detail.


                                                49


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


2.4. Development of a fibred probe for in vivo thermometry

       The thermometer endoscope is shown in Figure 2.14. We fix the Er/Yb glass probe at
the end of an optical fibre and use the fibre as guidance to illuminate the probe and collect its
emission signal.




Figure 2.14 Illustration of the fibred luminescence thermometer endoscope. Inset: photograph
of the extremity of the fibred probe.

   2.4.1. Double-clad optical fibre

       Optical fibres are optical waveguides allowing light to propagate over long distances.
They are normally classified into two families: multi-mode fibres and single-mode fibres. In
multi-mode fibres, light propagates in many different spatial modes, while in single-mode fibre,
only one propagating mode is possible. The distribution of energy is thus dimensionally more
confined in single-mode fibres than in multi-mode fibres. The light-guiding core shown in
Figure 2.15 is much smaller for single-mode fibres than for multi-mode fibres, and light
coupling in single-mode fibres requires more stringent coupling conditions. Optical fibres are
also characterised by their numerical aperture (NA) value, which determines the angle of the
acceptance cone ( 𝜃0 ), and is given by the refractive indices in the medium (𝑛0 ), core (𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 )
                                                       1 2       2
and cladding (𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 ) of the fibre: 𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃0 = 𝑁𝐴 = 𝑛 √𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 − 𝑛𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 .
                                                        0




                                               50


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




                    Figure 2.15 Principle of light propagation in optical fibres

          Besides these two classical families of fibres, there is another, less common type:
double-clad fibres. As shown in Figure 2.16, double-clad fibres have two concentric cores with
different refractive indices surrounding the fibre core. In the central fibre, single-mode light can
propagate, while multi-mode propagation occurs in the 1st cladding. Each of the two fibres has
a different refractive index, and therefore different NA value. A second cladding ensures light
confinement, as in classical single fibres. Finally, the whole fibre is often coated with Acrylate,
which has no optical role but mechanically protects it.




Figure 2.16 (a) Double-clad fibre structure and (b) refractive index profile. (Adapted from ref
140
      )

      2.4.2. The conception of the system

          We chose to use the double-clad fibre as a waveguide to both send excitation light to
the probe (through the central core), and to collect luminescence light (through the 1st cladding).
To maximise photon yield, the probe (with a typical diameter of 10~20 µm) needs to be
illuminated as efficiently as possible. The luminescence light should also be collected
efficiently. Double-clad fibres are good candidates to fulfil these conditions. The central single-
mode core(core diameter = 9.0 µm) ensures optimal spatial confinement of the excitation light
on the probe. However, due to its low NA (NA = 0.12), it is relatively inefficient to collect light

                                                51


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

emitted in all directions of space by the luminescent probe. The multi-mode fibre corresponding
to the 1st cladding has a higher NA and collection angle (NA = 0.2) and a larger collection
surface (diameter = 105.0 ± 5.0 µm), and is, therefore, more efficient for luminescence light
collection. After propagation in the direction opposite to that of the excitation, this
luminescence light is separated from the illumination light path using a dichroic mirror and
coupled to a fibred spectrometer for spectrum analysis.




               Figure 2.17 Optical path of stimulation and luminescence light
               in the double-clad optical fibre

   2.4.3. Fabrication of the endoscope

       The main difficulty in fabricating the endoscope is to attach a luminescent probe
properly onto the end of the optical fibre, well superposed with the fibre core. As the probe is
around 20 µm (which corresponds to the size of a single neuron), twice the size of the fibre
core, the precision needs to be around 10 µm. In order to achieve this, the cleaved fibre is fixed
onto an XYZ micro stage on top of a microscope glass slide. Another microscope, perpendicular
to the fibre axis, is used to observe along the horizontal direction. The complete process which
we optimised is as follows (shown in Figure 2.18):
       Step 1 - Move along the z-direction to dip the fibre in a small droplet of UV-curable
glue and then move back, leaving only very little glue on the fibre tip.
       Step 2 - Change for another slide with Er/Yb particles powder. Send illumination light
into the fibre from the distal side and approach the proximal fibre end to the glass slide.
       Step 3 - Move the glass slide with the micro stage to select an Er/Yb particle with proper
size and maximum luminescence intensity (some particles are more efficient than others) by
observing with the microscope camera (from the bottom) and the spectrum of the luminescence
light. Once the targeted probe is selected, move it carefully to the centre of the optical fibre

                                               52


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

until it is glued to the core of the fibre. Make sure the spectrum of luminescence light is always
optimised. Then move the fibre back up.
        Step 4 - Use UV light to polymerise the glue in order to fix the probe.
        Step 5 - To mechanically and chemically protect the Er/Yb particle, dip the ensemble
{fibre + particle} into UV glue as in step 1) to have a very small amount of glue that covers the
tip and particle.
        Step 6 - Polymerise it with UV lamp.
        Several probes were fabricated in each batch to ensure the availability of operational
probes, as they can be easily damaged during experiments.




                         Figure 2.18 Fibred probe fabrication process

   2.4.4. Calibration

        On the day of the experiment, we performed a calibration in water, using a process
similar to the one described for experiments in agar. Instead of an agar gel, the fibred probe is
put in water, close to a commercial thermocouple used as a temperature reference (as shown in
Figure 2.19(a)). While increasing the water temperature slowly, the spectrum of the
luminescence light 𝑆𝜆 (𝑇) was recorded every 2ms with an external trigger to the spectrometer,
and the temperature of the commercial thermocouple T was recorded every 2s using its internal
trigger. The temperature of the water was increased from room temperature to several degrees

                                               53


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

above 37°C, to cover the range which is relevant to our studies in vivo. After the acquisition,
we took 500 spectra acquired in 1s and averaged them to reliably derive the I525/I550 value. A
linear fit is made on ln(I525/I550) as a function of 1/T to derive the A and B values which will be
used later (as shown in Figure 2.19(b)).




Figure 2.19 Calibration of a temperature probe. (a) Er/Yb fibre probe is put close to the
thermocouple and immersed in water; the hotplate heats the water slowly while the fibred
system is registering the luminescence spectrum 𝑆𝜆 (𝑇) and thermocouple is registering
reference temperature T. (b) Calibration curve for finding the parameter A and B.

       Also, we realized that it is very important to perform a calibration for each fibre probe
on each day of the experiment, as, due to the possible environmental variations on the setup and
fabrication variations of the fibred probe, the calibrated values of A and B can significantly
vary from a day to another. Figure 2.20 shows the A and B values for 13 different calibrations
conducted on different days and different fibre probes in water. If we use calibration for one
probe to calculate the temperature rise values of another probe, they may yield variations up to
the order of 30% in the experimental result. It is thus essential to calibrate each probe on the
day of the experiment.




                                                54


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




            Figure 2.20 Variation of calibrated factors A and B for different probes

   2.4.5. Improving the signal to noise ratio for in vivo measurement

       In typical optogenetics experiments, we use 3-20 ms illumination time and 10-40 mW
of excitation power in a holographic spot of ~12 µm diameter. Therefore we need a temperature
resolution of the order of a few hundreds of millikelvin, and the temporal resolution should be
in the tens of milliseconds range. It is, therefore, crucial to optimise the signal to noise ratio of
our in vivo measurement for short acquisition time. In the following part, we discuss how the
integration time of the spectrometer, the illumination laser power, and the "periodic" averaging
method are chosen to improve the SNR, notably by decreasing noises, which we characterise
through the standard deviation of temperature 𝜎𝑇 .

    2.4.5.1. Integration Time

       The uncertainty of our temperature measurement can be derived from Equation 2.5:

                                        𝑇 2 𝜎𝑁525 𝜎𝑁550
                                   𝜎𝑇 =    [     +      ]                              Equation 2.6
                                        𝐵 𝑁525 𝑁550
where 𝑁525 and 𝑁550 are numbers of photoelectrons collected by the spectrometer for the two
peaks at λ = 525 nm and 550 nm, respectively.
       To maximise the SNR, we used a more sensitive spectrometer based on Czerny-Turner
optical design (Andor, Shamrock 500i coupled to an EMCCD-camera Ixon 888) with a grating
optimised to minimise optical losses in the λ = 500-600 nm wavelength range of interest.


                                                 55


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

Furthermore, the excitation power of the Er/Yb particle is chosen so as to work in a regime
where a large number of photoelectrons is detected (typ. 106-107) in each band. In such
conditions, we work in a regime limited by the photon noise 𝜎𝑆𝑁 and the camera reading noise
(typ. 10) 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 can be neglected:

                               2         2        2
                     𝜎𝑁550 = √𝜎𝑆𝑁,550 + 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 ≈ √𝜎𝑆𝑁,550 = √𝑁550                 Equation 2.7

                               2         2        2
                     𝜎𝑁525 = √𝜎𝑆𝑁,525 + 𝜎𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 ≈ √𝜎𝑆𝑁,525 = √𝑁525                 Equation 2.8

       Considering 𝑁550 = Φ550 ∗ 𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑡 and 𝑁525 = Φ525 ∗ 𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑡 where Φ525 and Φ550 are the
flux of photoelectrons in each band and 𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑡 the integration time, we can derive the temperature
measurement noise as:

                                     𝑇2      1     1
                             𝜎𝑇 =          [     +      ]                        Equation 2.9
                                    √𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑡 𝐵 √Φ525 √Φ550
        Therefore, we expect the standard deviation of temperature to be inversely proportional
to the square root of the integration time, which is in good agreement with the experimental
measurements shown in Figure 2.21.




              Figure 2.21 Standard deviation of the measured temperature as a
            function of the square root of the integration time of the spectrometer


                                              56


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       For integration times in the 0.5–4ms range, the standard deviation for a typical
measurement is well above the 1K scale. It is not sufficient for detecting temperature variation
during an optogenetics experiment. Moreover, other averaging techniques are necessary in
order to reach such performances while achieving millisecond temporal resolutions.

    2.4.5.2. Illumination laser power

       By increasing the illumination laser power on the Er/Yb particle probe, we can increase
the luminescence intensity emitted by the particle, thus increasing the number of collected
photons. Here, we study the relation between luminescence intensity and excitation laser power.
The luminescence intensity of the two emission lines was measured for excitation laser powers
from 2.28e-2 to 6.73 mW, as shown in Figure 2.22.




          Figure 2.22 Increase in luminescence intensity with excitation laser power

       The measurement results are fitted separately for each emission band (=525 or 550nm)
                             𝜆 𝑏
with a power law: 𝐼𝜆 = 𝑎𝜆 𝐼𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑟 . the coefficients 𝑎𝜆 and 𝑏𝜆 in this measurement are
a525=7.22.105 and b525=1.23 for the =525 nm line, and a550=4.07.106 and b550=1.17 for the
=550 nm line. These values are consistent with those measured in other works141,142 and, as
clearly visible in Figure 2.22, the upconversion phenomenon obeys the power law. We can thus
improve the signal by increasing the incident pumping laser power, and therefore use shorter
integration times.

                                              57


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       However, when increasing the illumination laser power, the local temperature of the
Er/Yb particle increases. This is mainly due to the absorption and nonradiative de-excitation in
the Er/Yb particle. This temperature increase is therefore related to the chemical composition
of the material and increases linearly with the incident laser power. In Figure 2.23, we compared
probes made using a glass of “50 GeO2 - 40 PbO - 10 PbF2 - 1 ErF3 - 1 YbF3” treated under
390°C for 10 hours (Er:Yb=1:1, called "composition 1" in Figure 2.23); and “PbO GeO2 PbF2
– Yb 20 Er 5” treated under 360°C for 4 hours (Er:Yb=5:20, "composition 2").




Figure 2.23 Temperature baseline increase with the excitation laser power, in 2 materials with
different chemical copositions: 50 GeO2 - 40 PbO - 10 PbF2 - 1 ErF3 - 1 YbF3 treated under
390°C for 10 hours (composition 1) and PbO GeO2 PbF2 – Yb 20 Er 5 treated under 360°C for
4 hours (composition 2)

       Although it should stay within reasonable limits to avoid interference with cell or tissue
metabolism, this offset does not influence the temperature measurement as we are usually
interested only in fast transient temperature rises induced by the optogenetic stimulation, but
not in the absolute temperature. All the following experiments have been carried out with
composition 2.




                                               58


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    2.4.5.3. Periodic averaging

       Averaging is clearly an efficient way to increase SNR. In order to maintain sufficient
time resolution while allowing as many averages as necessary to obtain the desired signal-to-
noise ratios, we used a time sampling strategy which is typically used in e.g. pump-probe
experiments based on periodic excitation. The method is illustrated in Figure 2.24. For each
optogenetic pulse (pulse duration tpulse = 30 ms), n spectra Si (with i=1 to n, here n=125) are
acquired out at a fast rate (period tsampling= 2ms). The spectrum Si (and temperature Ti) therefore
corresponds to a delay 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑖. t 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 with respect to the start of the optogenetic laser pulse.
This process can then be repeated as many times as necessary (here, N=500 times). Each of the
N spectra labelled Si corresponds to the same delay with respect to the excitation pulse and can
therefore be averaged together. This averaged spectrum <Si> clearly offers a measurement of
temperature at the instant 𝑡𝑖 = 𝑖. t 𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 with a much better SNR than a single spectrum Si as
discussed in Figure 2.25. As illustrated in Figure 2.24, the necessary signals are driven by an
Arbitrary Function Generator. By averaging the temperature rise time-trace with N=500 times,
the noise is massively decreased.




Figure 2.24 Principle of the triggering scheme used for time-resolved spectra averaging. One
 time-trace is the averaging result of N traces, and each trace is sampled by n times. Period
        ttriger is chosen so that the photoinduced temperature peak can drop close to 0.
                                                59


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       In Figure 2.25, we plotted the measured standard deviation of temperature σT under
different numbers of average. It shows that the standard error can be reduced massively by
averaging measurements. For 500 spectra averaged, the temperature noise σT reaches 0.05K
(for a pump power Ppump=60mW and an integration time tint=0.8ms).




Figure 2.25 Temperature noise reduction by averaging. (a) Evolution of the standard deviation
of temperature with the number of averaged spectra (N), measured for 0.8 ms integration time.
(b) Histogram of temperature variation from the mean temperature; (c) Temperature trace at
thermal equilibrium in water during 250 ms. For two different number of average (N = 1 and
N = 500).




                                             60


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


2.5. Validation in water

   2.5.1. Coupling to the two-photon optogenetic setup

       The two-photon optogenetic setup used for the in vivo experiment has been previously
described143, and it is similar to the one described in section 2.3.1. Briefly, The holographic
stimulation path is based on an LC-SLM located in a plane conjugated with the back focal plane
of the objective lens, which allows generating one or several 2P holographic spots. The laser is
externally gated to quickly modulate the intensity to generate optical holographic pulses or train
of pulses with typically 10-50 ms duration. In contrast to section 2.3.1, the thermometry
modality is now independent of the 2P scanning path, in the sense that the fibre endoscope
allows now both excitation of the Er/Yb probe and collection of the luminescence signal.
However, the 2P imaging path is needed to precisely locate in 3D the sensitive area of the
thermometric endoscope, e.g. the 15-20 µm diameter Er/Yb particle, within the sample.




Figure 2.26 Two-photo imaging and holographic stimulation in one setup. (a) while performing
the 2P imaging, the pump laser inside the fibre is turned off, and the Er/Yb particle can be
located through 2P scanning imaging. (b) while performing the holographic stimulation, the
fibre probe measures temperature beside the stimulation spot. A dichroic mirror (D1) combines
the two paths.




                                               61


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   2.5.2. Experimental process

       Before the in vivo experiment, a control experiment was conducted in water to validate
the system and avoid useless animal sacrificing. The thermometric endoscope was passed
through a glass capillary (with a sharpened end prepared by a micropipette puller) held by a
micromanipulator oriented with an angle of θ0 =31° to the horizontal plane, as shown in Figure
2.27. Using a water immersion objective (N40X-NIR - 40X Nikon CFI APO NIR Objective,
0.80 NA), the luminescence of the probe allows its localisation when a 2-photon imaging scan
is carried out (Figure 2.28).




Figure 2.27 Laser- induced temperature rise measurement using fibred Er/Yb particle thermal
sensor in a water cuvette

       One should note that, when measuring 2P luminescence from the top, the excitation
light is refracted by the glass of the fibre (see Figure 2.28(b)). Therefore, as clearly visible in
Figure 2.28(a), the 2P image of the luminescent probe is strongly distorted, but also shifted with
respect to its actual position. To evaluate and compensate for this effect, we developed a simple
model based on geometrical optics (detailed in Annex 2). Our calculation shows that the lateral
distance between the holographic spot and the probe is underestimated systematically by ~4µm
(considering 0=31°), and the depth of the probe is underestimated by ~30µm. Since the
temperature varies very quickly with the distance to the holographic spot, this offset was taken
into account during experiments and simulations.

                                                62


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.28 (a) Two-photon scanning image of the probe at the end of the optical fibre, in
water, viewed from the top, with a schematic indication of the holographic spot position; (b)
Schematic of the probe and holographic spot viewed from the side. 𝜃0 = 31° is the angle of the
fibre to the x-axis. The optical axis of the microscope objective is along the z-direction. The 2P
image of the probe (a) is refracted by the fibre while scanning from the top (z-direction).

   2.5.3. Experimental conditions

       During the temperature measurement, the probe is continuously illuminated by a pump
laser through the fibre core (λ = 976nm, P = 63.1mW at the exit of fibre), while the
luminescence light is collected through the 1st cladding of the fibre. A 12µm diameter
holographic spot is then periodically projected at a chosen distance from the temperature probe
(pulse duration tpulse =30 ms, a repetition rate of 4 Hz, an average power of P=170 mW). After
each optogenetic pulse, a series of n=125 spectra Si is acquired at a frequency of 500 Hz (period:
tsampling=2 ms) with an integration time of tint=0.8 ms. After N=500 optogenetic pulses, spectra
acquired at the same delay are averaged. The calibration (A, B) described above is then applied
to these n=125 spectra <Si> to obtain 125 values of the temperature rise at instants ti=i.tsampling.
The signal to noise ratio is highly improved by averaging these 500 time-traces to obtain a
single 125-points time-trace, as the error is decreased to 0.05 K.




                                                63


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

  2.5.4. Result and comparison with the simulation

       Figure 2.29 shows the evolution of temperature during the 250 ms following a laser
pulse. During this typical optogenetic stimulation, we observe a maximum temperature rise of
about 0.6 K. The averaging of 500 experiments gives a high temperature and time sensitivity to
resolve this temperature rise time-trace (following the protocol shown in Figure 2.24). In order
to remove the remaining DC components to the temperature, this signal is processed by
assuming that the temperature rise at the end of the measurement (25 points, between 200 and
250 ms after the pulse) reaches 0, as shown in Figure 2.29(a) (hollow circles).




Figure 2.29 Measured and simulated time-trace of the temperature rise caused by a single
holographic spot in water (P = 177mW, tpulse = 30ms, D = 12µm, distance from the probe r=
73µm). The two sets of measurement points represent the same data (a) without, or (b) with
compensation of a temperature baseline of 0.04 K. The error bar here contains the
measurement sensitivity of the system which is 0.05 K.

       These experimental results were compared to the simulation described in Section 1.2,
with improvements in terms of calculation speed and proper handling of the cyclic boundary
condition effect (aliasing) linked to the representation of an infinite medium in a finite
calculation space (see in Annex1).
       Temperature offset (0.04K): To compare the measured transient temperature rise (ΔT)
with the model, we need to subtract the baseline temperature value from the experimental data.
Our temperature time-trace is acquired by the periodic averaging, as discussed in Section


                                              64


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

2.4.5.3. In Figure 2.29(a), we assumed that the steady-state (ΔT=0) is reached 200 ms after the
optogenetic pulse. Thus, we approximated the baseline temperature as the average value of the
measured temperature between 200-250ms and removed it from the experimental results
(shown in hollow circles). However, simulations show that (black line in (a) and (b) is the same
simulation), the average value between 200-250ms is 0.04K, slightly over 0. For this reason,
data processing in Figure 2.29(a) that assumed a steady-state, which is not perfectly reached,
suffer from a slight offset.
       The model shows that reaching ΔT=0 K would require measurements at delays well
beyond 250 ms, which cannot be measured on our setup since the buffer of the spectrometer
cannot withstand a greater number of spectra. Therefore in Figure 2.29(b), we show the same
data to which a positive 0.04 K has been applied (full blue dots). Taking this offset into account,
the agreement between measurements and simulation is particularly good, both in terms of
maximum temperature rise value and decay dynamics.




                                                65


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


2.6. In vivo experiments

   2.6.1. The simulation method for scattering medium

       After having validated our model with the experiment in water, we performed the
experiment in vivo mice brain. In this case, the temperature probe can only provide
measurements at some finite distance 𝑟 ≥ 60 µ𝑚 from the centre of the holographic spot
(depending on the inserting angle and probe fabrication, as shown in Figure 2.28). This requires
us to precisely estimate, from these measurements at distance 𝑟, the temperature rise inside the
spot. To this end, we have adapted the simulation code to take into account the spatial
distribution of the heat source on and, due to the scattering, right outside the holographic spot.
Scattering at the macroscopic scale is characterized by two parameters (ls: scattering coefficient,
g: anisotropy) which have been measured or estimated for various biological tissues in
literature144. We will use the in vivo measurements outside of the holographic spot to validate
this model and then use it to estimate the exact temperature rise value inside the spot.
       Figure 2.30 shows the simulation process. It consists of mainly two parts: 1) building
the holographic spot heat source and 2) calculating the temperature map caused by heat
diffusion.
1) The field on SLM is calculated through an iterative Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm. A Fourier
    transform of this field ESLM provides the non-scattered field distribution in the focal plane.
    Using Fresnel propagation, we can back-propagate the field on the focal plane to the tissue's
    surface. From this field Esurface, we then use the “Beam Propagation Method” and add
    scattering effect, to propagate forward step by step. The scattering effect is materialised by
    multiplying the previous field with the complex transmission of a random phase mask
    characterised by ls and g at each finite step of the propagation. In this way, the 3D
    distribution of the holographic spot I in scattering tissue is simulated.
2) For weak absorption, the heat source distribution Q is proportional to the light intensity
    distribution: 𝑸 = 𝛼𝑰, with 𝛼 the absorption coefficient. As discussed in Section 1.2.2, the
    induced temperature rise can be expressed as the convolution of the heat diffusion equation
    Green's function 𝐺𝑇 (𝑟, 𝑡) by the heat source 𝑸(𝑟, 𝑡) whose spatial and temporal
    dependencies can be treated separately in our case: 𝑸(𝑟, 𝑡)= 𝛤(𝑟) Π(t). We first calculate
    the convolution for the spatial distribution 𝛤(𝑟) in the Fourier space through multiplication
    while considering an impulsive source in time (e.g. simulation time step dt=1ms). Then,
    for different pulse shape, a linear summation can realise the convolution for temporal term

                                                66


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    Π(t). To solve the boundary effect in Fourier space while heat reaches the border of the
    simulated volume, and ‘adapted voxel’ method is used to enlarge the voxel size with time
    steps. More details could be found in the Annex 1.




Figure 2.30 Simulation process. (a) Simulation of a holographic spot in scattering tissue, using
the beam propagation method. (b) Temperature simulation using the convolution of Green's
function of heat diffusion with the heat source Q.

       Once the 3D spatiotemporal map of the temperature rise is calculated, we can average
this distribution inside a sphere that represents the position and size of the Er/Yb probe to
simulate the time-traces measured in experiments.

   2.6.2. Experimental methods

       Transgenic mice of cortical expression of the calcium indicator GCaMP6s were used
during the in vivo experiments. They are 10-15 months old mice of the mouse line GP4.3 (The
Jackson Laboratory). A craniotomy at the primary visual cortex was prepared on the day of the
experiment. Cortical neurons expressing the fluorescence protein of GCaMP6s help indicate
the surface of the brain tissue and depth of Er/Yb particle beneath the brain by performing 2P
imaging. The mice preparation, 2P imaging and 2P optogenetic stimulations were operated by
I-Wen Chen, postdoc in the Emiliani's team. During experiments, mice were anesthetised with
isoflurane (2% for induction and 0.5–1% for experiments) and head-fixed under the water
immersed microscope objective.
       In vivo experiments require much caution to minimise damage and bleeding during the
penetration into brain tissues. A sharp glass capillary (pulled by micropipette puller and broken

                                               67


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

with a ceramic cutter at suitable diameter to let passe the fibre probe) held by a
micromanipulator is used to pierce the tough first layer of the brain surface, the meninges. This
capillary is then used to protect and guide the fibred probe during the first steps of its insertion
into the brain tissue. Figure 2.31(b) shows while using the sharp end of the glass capillary to
pierce the meninges, the fibre probe stays inside the capillary (the bright spot is the illuminated
probe while it is not yet penetrated into the tissue). Figure 2.31(c) shows that, after the capillary
has entered the tissue, it stays in its position, and the fibre probe is pushed into the tissue with
the guidance of the capillary. The fibre probe was positioned at 200~300 µm beneath the brain
surface. We can see the change of the bright spot compared to Figure 2.31(b), as tissue scatters
the luminescence light from the probe in Figure 2.31(c).




Figure 2.31 Widefield images of thermal 'endoscope' insertion process into the brain. On the
left image(a), the glass capillary is visible, and the probe is slightly out of the capillary. In the
middle(b), the luminescent particle at the tip of the probe is illuminated and clearly visible. The
probe stays inside the capillary while the capillary tip is penetrating the meninges. On the right
images(c), the luminescent particle stays illuminated as the probe is inserted through the
meninges with the cut pierced by the capillary tip. The scale bar is 500 µm.

       As shown in Figure 2.31(c) and Figure 2.32(a), the brain tissue is optically scattering,
particularly at visible wavelengths. For this reason, we used 2-photon scanning imaging, which
is less prone to scattering, to localise the probe, shown in Figure 2.32(b). Once the probe is
localised, two-photon holographic laser pulses of a 12 µm-diameter spot are focused under the
brain surface, at the depth at which the temperature probe is inserted. The measurement protocol
described earlier, in water, is applied to obtain the corresponding temperature rise.




                                                 68


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.32 Widefield and 2-photon scanning images of the probe after insertion in brain
tissues. In (a), the broad bright spot corresponds to the luminescence of the probe, which is
scattered by brain tissue, as the Er/Yb particle is excited by IR light sent through the fibre.
Accurate localisation of the probe is difficult to achieve because of this scattering. (b) The same
probe, imaged (false colours) using a scanned 2-photon illumination. The red spot is a
schematic indication of the holographic spot position. The probe is situated 330 µm below the
brain surface and around r=75 µm away from the optogenetic holographic spot. Scale bars are
50 µm.

   2.6.3. Results and comparison with the simulation

    2.6.3.1. Single-pulse

         We started by measuring the temperature rise induced by a stimulation spot of a
wavelength λ = 1030nm, diameter D = 12µm, average power at objective exit P = 180mW,
pulse duration tpulse = 30ms, at depth z = 330µm under the brain surface. We found that the
maximum temperature rise measured at a distance r = 75µm from the holographic spot centre
was ΔT = 1.06 ± 0.05K, as shown in Figure 2.33.




                                                69


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.33 In vivo temperature rise measured 75 µm away from a 180mW-30ms holographic
spot focused 330 µm below the surface of a live mouse brain. Blackline: simulation result with
r =75µm, ls = 166µm; black dashed line: simulation result with r =75µm, ls = 218µm; the grey
area is the error bar induced by uncertainty on the distance (r = 75±5µm) and scattering length
(ls varies between 166 and 218 µm, depending on the authors).

       This temperature rise is higher than what measured in water for similar illumination
conditions (Fig. 2. 29), which is consistent with the fact that, although their thermal properties
are very similar, at 1030 nm wavelength, brain tissues have three times higher optical absorption
coefficient than water137 (αbrain = 0.06 mm-1). Another feature that distinguishes the two
conditions (water and brain) is that brain tissues are highly scattering even in the infrared range;
as a result, the photons are deviated by their ballistic trajectory generating heating in a broader
region. The effects of scattering and consequent heat broadening are taken into account in the
simulation with two parameters: the scattering length ls and the scattering anisotropy g (see for
more details the Annex 1). The simulations shown in Figure 2.33 have been obtained by using
two values of the scattering length found in the literature, ls = 166µm (human grey matter137)
and ~ 218µm (model for mouse cortex145). While for the anisotropy factor, we use its value g
≈ 0,9, reported for different types of tissues137. Higher ls means less scattering, thus inducing
a ΔT more localised around the holographic spot. The black line in Figure 2.33 is the simulation
with ls = 166 µm, r =75µm, which fits better the experiment than for ls = 218µm. In the
following simulations (Figure 2.34, Figure 2.35 and Figure 2.36), we will therefore only use ls

                                                70


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

= 166 µm. The uncertainty on probe position (±5µm) also plays a role in determining the exact
temperature rise, as we will see below.
        Next, we measured the dependence of the temperature rise on the excitation power and
pulse duration. Figure 2.34 shows time-traces (dots) for different pulse powers P=180, 90 and
45 mW (other condition stays the same as Figure 2.33). Here, the peak values are proportional
to the laser power of the holographic spot, indicating that power and temperature rise have a
linear relationship consistent with the theoretical predictions (solid line and described in Section
1.2).




                    Figure 2.34 Temperature rises for different laser powers
                         (other conditions stay the same as Figure 2.33)

        Figure 2.35 shows the ΔT time-trace for different pulse durations tpulse = 10, 20 and 30
ms (other condition stays the same as Figure 2.33). The time constants of the temperature rises
are similar, as expected, and longer pulse durations lead to higher maximum temperature rises.
Precisely, for short pulses, the heating remains confined in the excitation spot and the
temperature increases nearly linearly with the pulse duration. For longer pulses, diffusion of the
heat out of the illuminated spot produces a sublinear dependence of ΔT on the pulse duration
                                   𝑟
tpulse, which follows a 𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑐 (2√𝐷𝑡). The peak value of the temperature is therefore not

proportional to the pulse duration. For long pulse durations, this value tends towards the DC
temperature induced by a continuous laser. The rise and decay fit perfectly with the simulation,
which means the thermal diffusivity 𝐷 = 𝜅/𝜌𝐶 are well represented in the model.
                                                71


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




            Figure 2.35 Temperature rise (experiment and simulation) for different
            pulse durations tpulse (other conditions stay the same as Figure 2.33)

    2.6.3.2. Heat accumulation of pulses train

       The linearity of heat diffusion allows us to simulate multi-pulse heating by a linear
summation of sequential pulses. Figure 2.36 shows temperature rises for five pulses of 10-ms
(power P = 180 mW) with variable repetition rates. For 10 Hz stimulation, the heat dissipation
after each photostimulation pulse is fast enough to bring the cell back to the equilibrium
temperature before the arrival of the next photostimulation pulse. Increasing the stimulation
repetition rate generates a heat accumulation after each photostimulation, which at a high
repetition rate (40Hz), makes the contribution of each pulse hardly distinguishable. In this case,
the peak temperature is about two times higher than the peak reached at 10 Hz repetition rate.




                                               72


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




   Figure 2.36 Temperature rise caused by a 5-pulses train with different repetition rates.

    2.6.3.3. Evolution of the maximum temperature rise with distance

       The most relevant information to define the heating during our optogenetic experiment
is the maximum temperature reached on the stimulated cells. Clearly, this temperature is
reached at the end of the excitation pulse, and at the centre of the holographic spot. However,
measurements within the holographic spot are not possible with our temperature endoscope,
since the 2-photon excitation would contribute to the excitation of the luminescent material and
change the calibration and temperature measurement. We can, however, use our thermal model
to extrapolate from the measurements carried out at a known distance from the sample, the
temperature rise at the centre of the spot. Figure 2.37 shows the measured maximum
temperature rise value at different distances of the probe from the centre of the holographic
spot. Each point corresponds to the peak of the corresponding time traces like those of Figure
2.33, acquired at various known distances from the centre of the holographic spot. Simulations
were carried out using two different ls values: 166 and 218 µm, in order to indicate margins of
error related to this value (in grey). The error bar on experiment results stands for σT=0.05K


                                              73


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

(vertical) and uncertainty on the distance σr=5µm (horizontal). It is worth mentioning that time-
traces at all these positions fit the simulations equally well, as in Figure 2.33




   Figure 2.37 Maximum temperature rise at different distances from the holographic spot.

       Consistent with the findings reported in Figure 2.35, Figure 2.37 shows that simulation
results for ls = 166 µm indicate a better agreement with the measurements than for ls=218µm
(except for ls, all other simulation parameters are fixed). With this curve, our evaluation of the
maximum temperature rise at the centre of a 12-µm diameter holographic spot is around 3.5K
(P = 180mW, tpulse = 30ms). This means that for a typical in vivo 2P optogenetics holographic
stimulation (λ = 1030nm, NA = 0.8, P = 10 - 50mW, tpulse = 10 - 30ms), the maximum
temperature rise in the centre will not exceed a single K, as shown by simulation in Figure 2.38
and Figure 2.39 and summarised in the following table:

Table 1 Expected maximum temperature rise induced by a 12µm-diameter holographic spot at
z=330µm under brain surface for different power(objective exit) and pulse duration. ΔTmax [K]

                                              Maximum temperature rise ΔTmax [K]
           tpulse [ms]
                                           P = 10 mW                         P = 50 mW
               10                              0.14                                 0.70
               30                              0.20                                 0.99



                                                74


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.38 Expected temperature rise induced by a 10ms-pulse duration, 12µm-diameter,
holographic spot at 330µm deep from the brain surface. (a) Temperature maps on the focal
plane at different time delays from the start of the pulse; the pulse power is 50mW. (b)
Temperature time-trace on the spot, the average value within the spot area (dashed line) and
maximum value in the centre (line); red for 50mW pulse power and black for 10mW pulse
power. Using scattering coefficient ls =166µm, g = 0.9.




                                             75


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 2.39 Expected temperature rise induced by a 30ms-pulse duration, 12µm-diameter,
holographic spot at 330µm deep from the brain surface. (a) Temperature maps on the focal
plane at different time delays from the start of the pulse; the pulse power is 50mW. (b)
Temperature time-trace on the spot, the average value within the spot area (dashed line) and
maximum value in the centre (line); red for 50mW pulse power and black for 10mW pulse
power. Using scattering coefficient ls =166µm, g = 0.9.




                                             76


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


2.7. Conclusion

       We have designed and implemented an experimental system to measure in vitro and in
vivo the temperature rise caused by microscale holographic illumination with a thermal
sensitivity that can reach 0.05 K and millisecond temporal resolution.
       The system uses the temperature dependence of the luminescence from Er/Yb glass
particles to measure local temperature rises induce by two-photo illumination.
       At first, we have embedded the Er/Yb glass particles in an agar solution and water and
optimized the model parameters to reproduce the experimental data. Secondly, we have
extended the use of our system for in vivo experiments in mice brain.
       To this end, we have demonstrated a thermal endoscope where an Er/Yb glass particle
is glued at the tip of a double-clad fibre inserted in a glass micropipette placed into the brain
using a micromanipulator. A 12µm-diameter holographic spot was generated at 330µm under
the brain surface using a 1030nm laser. For a single pulse of 180mW-power and 30ms-duration
sent to the holographic spot, we observed at 66 µm away from the spot centre a maximum
temperature rise of 1.25K at the end of 30ms illumination. Using our simulation model validated
by the experimental data, we estimate the maximum temperature rise at the centre of the spot
as 3.5K after 30ms illumination. For typical in vivo 2P optogenetic experiments, 5-30ms pulse
duration and 10-50mW laser power is usually used. We estimate for a single stimulation pulse
with 10ms-duration, the maximum temperature rise on the spot is 0.71K for 50mW-power
(0.14K for 10mW-power); for 30ms-duration, the maximum temperature rise on the spot is
0.99K for 50mW-power (0.20K for 10mW-power). To our knowledge, such 2P optogenetics-
induced temperature rises had never been measured so far.
       We also show that, for a train of optogenetic stimulation pulses, the repetition rate
should be limited in order to avoid heat accumulation from one pulse to the next. The heat
accumulation is a linear process thus easy to deduce from our single pulse model. This
simulation model can, therefore, predict the temperature rise caused by multiple pulses with
various pulse durations or repetition rates.
       This temperature endoscope was explicitly developed to predict temperature rise under
a 2P optogenetics experiment but is actually quite versatile. It can also be applied in many other
contexts, for example, to measure the temperature rise caused by 2P/3P imaging. The design of
the endoscope can also be adjusted for different needs. For example, the double-clad fibre
structure can be replaced by a thinner fibre structure, such as single-mode fibres or fibres with
a tapered tip, particularly if lower sensitivities are acceptable (since thinner fibres will collect

                                                77


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

luminescence less efficiently. With a thinner probe, one can measure closer to the target and
cause less damage but sacrifice fast temporal resolution or thermal sensitivity.


1) The results presented in Section 2.3 of this chapter have been published in:

Temperature Rise under Two-Photon Optogenetic Brain Stimulation

Cell Reports 2018 24 (5), 1243-1253.e5, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.119

2) The rest of the results presented are collected in a manuscript in preparation.




                                               78


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


Chapter 3
Reconfigurable Microscale Temperature Control

Summary

  3.1.   Introduction                                                                 80
  3.2.   Plasmonic thermal effect of gold nanoparticles                               82
    3.2.1.   Modelling of light absorption by a single particle                       82
    3.2.2.   Heat diffusion for a single particle model                               84
  3.3.   Reconfigurable temperature control using light shaping                       86
    3.3.1.   Temperature shaping by gold nanoparticles assemblies                     86
    3.3.2.   Collective effects in heat diffusion                                     87
    3.3.3.   Pre-compensating the collective effect                                   88
    3.3.4.   Temperature shaping implementation                                       89
  3.4.   Experimental setups and methods                                              91
    3.4.1.   Optical path of the setup                                                91
    3.4.2.   Homogeneous surface absorber                                             92
    3.4.3.   Phase-only SLM and Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm for light shaping          94
    3.4.4.   Temperature imaging using wavefront sensing                              95
  3.5.   Results                                                                     101
    3.5.1.   Uniform temperature increase control                                    101
    3.5.2.   Temperature control with different locations and values                 102
    3.5.3.   Towards biological application: selective heating at sub-neuron scale   104
    3.5.4.   Discussion on homogeneity and reliability                               105
  3.6.   Conclusion                                                                  111




                                              79


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


3.1. Introduction

       In the previous chapter, we have demonstrated an experimental system to measure
photoinduced temperature variations inside the brain with high temperature and spatiotemporal
resolution. These experiments enabled the validation of a previously developed theoretical
model to predict the temperature rise under different illumination conditions to prevent eventual
thermal damages when designing an optical experiment on biological preparation.
       Although the literature on thermal photodamage effect is very rich, only very few pieces
of information are today available on the effects of small (few Ks) temperature increases on,
e.g., the electrophysiological properties114 of small cellular compartments (dendrites, axon, cell
soma). Such effects are also the main focus of an emerging field in neuron science, called
thermogenetics146–148, where controlled heating is applied to locally modify neuronal activity.
Also, the effects of local heating on organs, non-neuronal cells or organelles are of much
interest to understand hyperthermia (e.g. surgery, or cancer cell destruction) and heat-induced
metabolic changes. In all of these cases, an essential first step is to be able to deliver heat to
living cells or organelles in a careful and localised fashion, in order to reach the targeted
purposes efficiently, with minimal perturbation or damage to surrounding tissue. It is thus
important to control precisely the spatial extent of temperature rises.
       In addition to spatial control, temporal aspects are also essential. Some biological
activities, such as, e.g. action potential onset in neurons, happen at the millisecond scale. Being
able to modify the temperature on similarly short time scales is important. There are existing
temperature control techniques at different scales based on different physics: heating ovens,
chambers, chucks or stages, using various heat sources (electrical, optical, chemical, phase
transitions…) and various means to carry heat to the target (diffusion in conductive materials,
fluid transport…). However, very few techniques are suitable for biological applications. They
either take too long to reach thermal equilibrium (thermalizing an incubator, or an entire
microscope, takes minutes to hours), due to the large heated volume or cannot heat locally and
homogeneously at the microscale. Due to thermal diffusion, the spatial and temporal aspects
are intrinsically interwoven, and a faster and local thermal response adapted to cell activities is
required.
       Here we introduce a new temperature control technique using thermo-plasmonic
nanoparticles as efficient optical absorbers to generate thermal effects associated to light
shaping, which allows to control the local temperature at microscale reconfigurably with short
response time and high precision. The applications of thermo-plasmonic gold NPs in biology

                                                80


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

have already drawn much attention for decades. Gold NPs are stable and have excellent
biological compatibility149–151. They display resonances that can be tuned from visible to NIR
by modifying their morphology and size. Gold also has rich surface chemistry that allows
functionalisation with various chemical compounds. This feature allows targeting chosen
locations, cells, or organ types in the body. For example, it has been applied to the
thermotherapy of cancers152,153 using gold nanoshells. It can also be applied to neuron thermal
activation by binding gold NPs to neuronal membrane proteins154.




Figure 3.1 General illustration of microscale reconfigurable temperature control by light
shaping. The upper layer is a substrate with a homogeneous thermo-plasmonic NPs carpet. The
light pattern (in green) is projected on this layer to create temperature variations on it.

       In this chapter, we will first introduce the physics and recent applications of plasmonic
thermal effects in gold NPs. Then we will present an existing deterministic method that uses
gold NP assemblies as light-to-heat transducers to control temperature rises at the microscale155.
In this method, a pre-engineered array of NPs is employed, in which the collective heating
effect caused by heat diffusion is carefully managed to obtain the desired heat distribution. Gold
NPs are distributed on a substrate into a pattern that leads to a desired temperature rise result
under homogeneous light illumination. However, this temperature pattern is fixed.
       Inspired by this method, we will introduce a new method that tailors the illumination
light intensity instead, while using homogeneous gold NPs distribution, as shown in Figure 3.1,
to achieve the same purpose but in a reconfigurable manner. By changing the projected light
pattern, temperature patterns can be tuned at will. This new method is demonstrated
experimentally on a planar surface while the temperature map is measured using a wavefront
sensing technique103,104.




                                               81


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


3.2. Plasmonic thermal effect of gold nanoparticles

   3.2.1. Modelling of light absorption by a single particle

       Plasmonic heating is caused by an enhanced light absorption during the surface
plasmonic resonance process. Gold nanoparticles (NPs) feature remarkable optical properties
allowing plasmonic processes. They support resonances in electron plasma-photon known as
Localized Surface Plasmons (LSPs) that can be excited upon illumination. This strong
electronic movement in a lossy, or resistive, metal such as gold induces Joule heating.
Depending on the morphology and dielectric environment of the NPs, those resonances can be
tuned from the visible to the near-infrared frequency range. LSPs are responsible for the
enhanced absorption and scattering of light in these NPs, which was considered as an unwanted
effect for a long time. However, it was realized recently that this effect can transform the NP
into a remotely-controllable nano heat source, providing a powerful way of thermally-induced
phenomena at the nanoscale.156,157




Figure 3.2 Photothermal heating of a 100 nm gold nanosphere placed in water. (a) Schematic
view of a nanosphere with the external electric field 𝐸 and wavevector 𝑘 of the illumination
light, (b) electric near-field intensity normalized to the incident field intensity, (c) heat
generation density, and (d) equilibrium distribution of temperature increases for a light
wavelength of λ=530 nm, (e) absorption power as a function of light wavelength. The light
incident intensity is 1 mW/µm² for all cases. (Figure adapted from ref157)

       To present the physics of plasmonic heating, we consider a simple model: a gold
nanosphere with complex relative permittivity 𝜀(𝜔) is immersed in a transparent dielectric
medium of real relative permittivity 𝜀𝑠 = 𝑛𝑠2 , 𝑛𝑠 being the refractive index. This nanosphere is
illuminated by a light with a complex amplitude 𝐄𝟎 (𝐫) , defined such that 𝐄𝟎 (𝐫, t) =
                                                                      𝑐0 𝑘
𝑅𝑒[𝐄𝟎 (𝐫)eiωt ]; 𝜔 is the angular frequency, defined as 𝜔 = 𝑐0 𝑘0 =          , where 𝑐0 is the speed
                                                                      𝑛𝑠



                                               82


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

of light in vacuum, 𝑘0 and 𝑘 are the wave vectors in free space and in the medium, respectively,
as illustrated in Figure 3.2(a).
       LSPs are generated by the interaction between light and conductive NPs of a size
comparable to or smaller than the light wavelength. Here, the sphere radius 𝑅 is much smaller
than the wavelength (tens of nm), and the NPs can be considered as an electromagnetic dipole.
Under this assumption, the sphere polarizability reads:

                                                   𝜀(𝜔) − 𝜀𝑠
                                   𝛼(𝜔) = 4𝜋𝑅 3              .                       Equation 3.1
                                                  𝜀(𝜔) + 2𝜀𝑠

and relates the complex amplitude of the polarization vector of the NP to the excitation field
via 𝐏 = 𝜀0 𝜀𝑠 𝛼𝐄𝟎 . From Equation 3.1, the resonance occurs at a frequency 𝜔 where the bottom
part of the fraction approaches zero, i.e. 𝜀(𝜔) ≈ −2𝜀𝑠 . This can occur at visible frequencies in
some noble metals and leads to a high polarizability value 𝛼(𝜔) . However, the dipolar
approximation only holds for small particles. More complex models are required for larger
spheres, such as the Mie theory, which considers retardation effects in particles with non-
negligible sizes compared to the wavelength. For NPs with more complex geometries,
numerical simulations such as discrete dipole approximation (DDA) can be used to find the
resonance wavelength158.
       This plasmonic resonance is responsible for peaks in both light absorption and scattering.
For example, in a spherical gold NP with a diameter smaller than 30 nm in water, this resonance
occurs around λ=530 nm159. The efficiency of these processes can be described by the following
absorption (𝜎𝑎𝑏𝑠 ) and scattering (𝜎𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑡 ) cross-sections:

                                                       𝑘4
                                   𝜎𝑎𝑏𝑠 = 𝑘𝐼𝑚(𝛼) −        |𝛼|2                       Equation 3.2
                                                       6𝜋
                                                 𝑘4
                                       𝜎𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑡 =      |𝛼|2                             Equation 3.3
                                                 6𝜋
                              𝜎𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝜎𝑎𝑏𝑠 + 𝜎𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑡 = 𝑘𝐼𝑚(𝛼)                           Equation 3.4

Depending mostly on the morphology of NPs, the relative efficiency of absorption and
                                                                                 𝜎
scattering processes is often quantified by the photothermal efficiency 𝜇 = 𝜎 𝑎𝑏𝑠        160,161
                                                                                                   . For
                                                                                  𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑡

example, in water, for gold NPs smaller than 90 nm, absorption is the dominant effect, while
for larger gold NPs, scattering dominates. According to this property, one can design NPs that
are optimised for light absorption and heat conversion.

                                                  83


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       Using the absorption cross-section 𝜎𝑎𝑏𝑠 , the power absorbed by a NP illuminated with
an irradiance I reads:


                                               𝑄 = 𝜎𝑎𝑏𝑠 𝐼                        Equation 3.5

It can also be derived from the heat power density 𝑞(𝐫) inside the NP such that 𝑄 =

∫𝑉 𝑞(𝐫) 𝑑3 𝑟, with 𝑉 the spatial domain limited by the volume of the NP. 𝑞(𝐫) is generated via
the Joule effect and reads162,163:


                                              1                                  Equation 3.6
                                     𝑞(𝐫) =     𝑅𝑒[𝐉 ∗ (𝐫) ∙ 𝐄(𝐫)]
                                              2


where 𝐉(𝐫) = 𝑖𝜔𝐏 is the electronic current density, and 𝐄 is the electrical field inside the NP.
As 𝐏 = 𝜀0 𝜀(𝜔)𝐄, 𝑞(𝐫) is finally:

                                          𝜔
                                𝑞(𝐫) =      𝜀 𝐼𝑚(𝜀(𝜔))|𝐄(𝐫)|2                    Equation 3.7
                                          2 0

   3.2.2. Heat diffusion for a single particle model

       For a single gold NP under continuous-wave illumination, the steady-state temperature
distribution 𝑇(𝐫) inside and outside of the NP should then be resolved with the heat diffusion
equation:


                                −𝜅𝑔𝑜𝑙𝑑 𝛻 2 𝑇(𝐫) = −𝑞(𝐫) for |𝐫| ≤ 𝑅              Equation 3.8

                                      𝜅𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝛻 2 𝑇(𝐫) = 0 for |𝐫| > 𝑅            Equation 3.9

Here, we consider a single NP immersed in water and a visible-range illumination. The light
absorption in water can be neglected at the wavelength we use (532 nm); Equation 3.8 and
Equation 3.9 only considers heat sources inside the sphere ( |𝐫| ≤ 𝑅 ). The large thermal
conductivity of gold (𝜅𝑔𝑜𝑙𝑑 = 318 𝑊𝑚−1 𝐾 −1), its large contrast with the conductivity of water
(𝜅𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 = 0.6 𝑊𝑚−1 𝐾 −1), and the small size of the particle mean that the temperature can be
considered homogeneous inside the particle although 𝑞(𝐫) is not necessarily uniform. In other
words, heat diffuses so fast inside the NP that the temperature inside the NP is nearly uniform
compared to the temperature distribution in water. This Uniform Temperature Approximation


                                                    84


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

(UTA) is commonly used to solve the problem157. Under this approximation, the temperature
increases in the particle and in the surrounding medium, deduced from the heat diffusion
equation, can be approximated as164:

                                                             𝑄
                                    ∆𝑇(𝐫) ≈ ∆𝑇𝑁𝑃 = 4𝜋𝜅                for |𝐫| ≤ 𝑅    Equation 3.10
                                                            𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑅

                                                𝑄
                                 ∆𝑇(𝐫) = 4𝜋𝜅              = 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 . 𝑄 for |𝐫| > 𝑅     Equation 3.11
                                                𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑟



                      𝑄
where ∆𝑇𝑁𝑃 = 4𝜋𝜅              is generated by the absorbed power 𝑄 = 𝜎𝑎𝑏𝑠 𝐼 = ∫𝑉 𝑞(𝐫) 𝑑 3 𝑟 in a
                    𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑅

homogeneous medium of thermal conductivity 𝜅𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 , 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 is the thermal Green’s function in
                          1
steady-state 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 = 4𝜋𝜅             defined in Chapter 1 (Equation 1.11). The temperature diffuses as
                          𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑟

1
    outside of the NP heat source. Taking 𝑅 = 1 and ∆𝑇𝑁𝑃 = 1, the temperature increase has a
𝑟

radial distribution which is shown in Figure 3.3.




Figure 3.3 Temperature profile with a spherical gold NP heat source, according to Equation
3.10 and Equation 3.11, using normalised coordinates 𝑅 = 1 and ∆𝑇𝑁𝑃 = 1.

When modelling the 2D temperature induced by a collection of nanoparticles, collective effects
must be taken into account. This can be achieved by calculating the convolution of the heat
source distribution with the thermal Green’s function in steady-state 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 , as discussed in the
following sections.




                                                     85


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


3.3. Reconfigurable temperature control using light shaping

   3.3.1. Temperature shaping by gold nanoparticles assemblies

       By distributing gold NPs into the targeted medium and using light at a wavelength
overlapping their plasmonic resonance, one can efficiently heat the NPs as well as the
surrounding medium. Since heat is a diffusive phenomenon, it is harder to manipulate than light,
which is a propagating phenomenon, but using NPs as light-to-heat transducers offers an
efficient way to turn a light distribution into a heat distribution. However, the relation between
light absorption and the temperature is not straightforward because of heat diffusion: uniform
light absorption does not lead to uniform temperature distribution, an issue that needs to be
carefully addressed.
       To solve this issue, we calculate an appropriate Heat Source Density (HSD) to pre-
compensate heat diffusion and create a temperature profile that optimally approaches desired
values. This approach has been proposed and demonstrated experimentally by Baffou et al. in
2014 by locally engineering the light absorption of the substrate155. Assemblies of metal NPs
were fabricated by e-beam lithography165 on a thermally insulating, 2D substrate, with a local
density of absorbers matching the desired HSD. Homogeneous illumination of these assemblies
then yielded the desired temperature distribution. The average temperature could be changed
easily by tuning the optical intensity. However, the temperature distribution could not be
modified after e-beam fabrication: the thermal pattern was fixed.
       Here, we show that a homogeneous array of plasmonic NPs on glass can also be used to
obtain a chosen temperature pattern. Instead of shaping the substrate itself, we propose to use
an absorbing layer that is homogeneous at the wavelength scale and to pattern the illumination
to produce the desired HSD, as illustrated in Figure 3.1. Among the various available light-
patterning techniques, we chose to use a phase Spatial Light Modulator (SLM) as it provides
interesting speed and good power-efficiency. Using it to engineer the wavefront properly in the
Fourier plane, we created chosen intensity patterns in the image plane to illuminate the
homogeneous NPs array.




                                               86


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   3.3.2. Collective effects in heat diffusion




           Figure 3.4 Calculated temperature rise (right) induced by a homogeneous
          HSD applied within a square region (left). The temperature is clearly higher
                      at the centre of the square region than at the edges.

        Here, we aim at creating a 2D temperature pattern in a microscopic region of a
macroscopic sample with thermal conductivity 𝜅. The whole sample typically has cm-range
dimensions. It can therefore be assumed to remain at a constant bulk temperature 𝑇0 , or can be
actively stabilized at 𝑇0 if necessary. The 2D domain of interest (D), where ∆𝑇(𝑟) is targeted,
is meshed using 𝑁 identical square units, each with an area 𝑎2 and an identical average
absorption cross-section 𝜎, since the substrate has a homogeneous absorption at the scale of 𝑎
(the number of absorbing nanoparticles within 𝑎2 is large enough to neglect variations). For
each unit cell 𝑖 , we note 𝑄𝑖 the heat source (in W) and ∆𝑇𝑖 the temperature rise. The ∆𝑇𝑖
distribution in the sample is actually the convolution of the HSD with the thermal Green’s
                                      1
function in steady-state 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 = 4𝜋𝜅             , as mentioned in Chapter 1 (Equation 1.11).
                                      𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟 𝑟

        A relatively natural idea in order to obtain a homogeneous temperature within a chosen
domain of interest D (e.g. a square) would be to apply a homogeneous HSD within the domain
of interest D. However, as shown in Figure 3.4, simulations indicate that the resulting
temperature increase profile has a hot centre. It is not hard to understand that the centre receives
thermal contributions from all neighbouring heat sources within the square domain, whereas
the edges of the square, for instance, do not. These collective effects have been discussed in
detail in ref166.




                                                     87


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

  3.3.3. Pre-compensating the collective effect




              Figure 3.5 Calculated HSD yielding a homogeneous temperature
                  rise within a targeted area and resulting temperature rise.

       If the temperature is obtained by the convolution ∆𝑻 = 𝑸 ∗ 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 , it appears reciprocally
that the HSD 𝑄𝑖 which must be applied to a sample in order to obtain a chosen temperature
pattern ∆𝑻 can be calculated by deconvolving by 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 . This deconvolution can be computed
numerically by a matrix inversion restricted to the domain D, as described in ref155. When
applying a spatial HSD noted 𝐐 in vector form (𝐐 = (𝑄𝑖 )𝑖∈[1,𝑁] ), where “𝑖” designates one of
the 𝑁 location coordinates, the resulting temperature increase distribution ∆𝐓 ( ∆𝐓 =
(∆𝑇𝑖 )𝑖∈[1,𝑁] ) can be calculated using a simple matrix multiplication: ∆𝐓 = 𝔸𝐐, where 𝔸 is an
𝑁 × 𝑁 coupling matrix defined by:


                                           ln(1+√2)
                                              𝜋𝜅𝑎
                                                      ,𝑖 = 𝑗
                                    𝔸𝑖𝑗 = {     1                               Equation 3.12
                                                     ,𝑖   ≠𝑗
                                              4𝜋𝜅𝑟𝑖𝑗




Each term 𝔸𝑖𝑗 corresponds to the contribution of the heat deposited in region 𝑗 to the
temperature of region 𝑖, with 𝑟𝑖𝑗 the distance between these two regions. Inverting this matrix
𝔸 provides a way to calculate the HSD 𝐐 yielding the desired temperature map ∆𝐓, which
writes: 𝐐 = 𝔸−1 ∆𝐓.




                                              88


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   3.3.4. Temperature shaping implementation




Figure 3.6 Comparison of two temperature shaping methods. Method 1(left column): NP
distribution tailoring while using a homogeneous illumination (top left sketch). The SEM image
                                                    155
(bottom) of NP distribution is adapted from ref           . Method 2(right column): Illumination
tailoring on a homogeneous NP substrate (top right sketch). The experimental image of the
corresponding shaped illumination (bottom right) shows the backscattering by the substrate,
which reflects the illumination pattern. The inhomogeneity of light intensity is due to speckle,
which will be discussed later in 3.5.4.1.

       As mentioned at the beginning of 3.3.1, there are two ways to obtain a tailored HSD:
tailoring the distribution of NPs or tailoring the intensity of illumination. The 1st method is
illustrated in Figure 3.6 (left): metal NPs are patterned by lithography on a 2D substrate to
reproduce the calculated HSD. Under homogeneous illumination at their plasmonic resonance
wavelength, the desired temperature rise can be created. This method developed by Baffou et
al. in 2014 was named TSUNA for “Temperature Shaping Using Nanoparticle Assemblies”155.
It is deterministic and effective. However, e-beam lithography is costly, and once the pattern is
determined and fabricated, it cannot be changed. This feature is particularly problematic for

                                               89


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

biological applications since the position and shape of the cells (or organelles) is not known in
advance.
       Instead of shaping the NP distribution, we chose to shape the light distribution under
the microscope and use a distribution of plasmonic NPs homogeneous on the planar substrate
(Figure 3.6–Method 2). As 𝑄 = 𝜎𝑎𝑏𝑠 𝐼, the light intensity pattern is identical to the HSD pattern.
The substrate absorbs the light energy at the resonant wavelength and creates a designed
temperature map. Following a workflow that will be discussed in 3.4.3, one can change the
temperature map at will.




                                               90


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


3.4. Experimental setups and methods

  3.4.1. Optical path of the setup




      Figure 3.7 Experimental setup for temperature shaping and temperature imaging

       The optical path of the experimental setup is shown in Figure 3.7. There are two beams
combined in this setup for separated functions: a heating beam at λ = 532nm and a probe beam
at λ = 407nm. The heating beam is a plane-wave coming out of the laser source and is expanded
to illuminate all the SLM pixels. The SLM modifies the wavefront and projects the desired light
intensity pattern, identical to the HSD pattern, onto the sample plane to illuminate the
homogeneous surface absorber. There is an intermediate image plane between the SLM and
objective, where a spatial mask cancels higher-order images and the 0-order diffraction peak.
Another plane-wave passes through the sample from the top of the sample, illuminating a region
that includes the heated sample. The sample is then imaged on a wavefront sensor for further
thermal imaging analysis based on wavefront sensing.




                                              91


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   3.4.2. Homogeneous surface absorber




Figure 3.8 (a) Example of a SEM image of a quasi-hexagonal array of gold NPs obtained by
diblock copolymer lithography (adapted from ref166). (b) Image of the sample fixed in a petri
dish (a window is opened at the centre of the petri dish), taken by a simple cell phone camera
with white background. (c) Cross-section of extinction, absorption and scattering for spherical
gold nanoparticles of 28 nm-diameter, normalised by πR² where R is the radius of the sphere.
The calculation is done using the Mie theory167.

       In order to efficiently convert optical intensity into heat, the substrate has to be covered
with a homogeneous surface absorber, ideally with narrow-band absorption to allow
transmission imaging at other wavelengths. We used a substrate consisting of an array of 28
nm-diameter spherical gold NPs on a glass coverslip, with uniform quasi-hexagonal
distribution; an example is shown in Figure 3.8(a), and a 72 nm average interparticle distance.
The sample was made by diblock copolymer micellar lithography, based on a protocol
developed by J. Polleux165; an image is shown in Figure 3.8. Under illumination at NP
resonance wavelength, near λ = 532 nm, much of the optical energy is converted into heat, an
efficient process sometimes called thermo-plasmonic conversion. This localized heat then
diffuses into the surrounding medium. The non-percolated gold NPs are not expected to
substantially change the lateral heat diffusivity, which is essentially that of the glass substrate.
The plasmonic resonance wavelength of the particles is well adapted to efficient absorption
over a relatively narrow band near λ= 532 nm, and the biocompatibility of the NP system is
excellent156.
       There are two distinct regimes describing the temperature repartition for a gold NPs
array under CW illumination: a) the temperature confinement regime, where the temperature
increase is confined to the vicinity of each nano heat source, and b) the temperature

                                                92


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

delocalization regime, where temperature is smooth throughout the whole illuminated region166.
Figure 3.9 shows examples of the two regimes. Figure 3.9(a) is in the temperature confinement
regime, whereas Figure 3.9(b) in the temperature delocalization regime. A factor ζ is defined in
the publication of Baffou et al. 2013166 to predict which regime applies (for a 1D array: ζ1=
  𝑝                               𝑝2
        , for 2D distribution: ζ2= 3𝐿𝑅, where p is the interdistance, R the radius of nanosphere, L
2𝑅𝑙𝑛(𝑁)

the characteristic size of the illuminated area and N the number of particles). The interparticle
distances, the diameter of NPs and number of illuminated NPs (or characteristic size of the
illuminated zone) can all contribute to this factor. In our case, the size of the NP is driven by
the resonance wavelength (28 nm and 532 nm respectively), and the interparticle distance is the
main parameter to reach the temperature delocalization regime (b), which ensures a smooth
temperature all over the NP carpet under CW illumination despite the nanometric size of the
NPs. With a 72 nm interdistance, ζ is much smaller than 1, which means that we are in the
temperature delocalization regime and the NPs layer can be considered as a spatially
homogeneous absorbing layer.




Figure 3.9 Calculated temperature distribution across a NP chain with different interparticle
distances, illuminated in CW regime. (a) 5 NPs with 15nm diameter and 250nm interparticle
distance; (b) 1001 NPs (only a few shown in the figure) with 25nm diameter and 100nm
interparticle distance. (Figure adapted from ref166)




                                                93


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   3.4.3. Phase-only SLM and Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm for light shaping




Figure 3.10 Reconfigurable temperature-shaping workflow (calculated images). ∆𝑻 is the
desired temperature increase distribution; 𝑸 is the associated HSD distribution; 𝚽 is the
corresponding phase distribution in the Fourier plane of the illumination pattern; 𝑰 is the light
intensity distribution in the sample plane; ∆𝑻′ is the resulting temperature increase distribution.

       As discussed in Section 3.3.4, the HSD (Heat Source Density) can be created by
                                                               𝐐
projecting onto the surface an optical intensity pattern 𝐈 = 𝜎 . While several techniques allow

light patterning, parallel illumination techniques based on SLMs have the advantage of offering
much higher temporal resolution compared to scanning-based methods. Acting either on the
phase or the intensity of the incident beam, SLMs provide in both cases an arbitrarily-defined
intensity distribution of light in the focal plane of the objective. The main drawback of intensity
modulators (such as Digital Mirror Devices) is an extremely poor efficiency when creating
sparse targets, as most of the light is rejected out of the optical path and does not reach the
sample. Here, we modulate the phase using a Liquid Crystal SLM in order to preserve light
power and efficiently generate heat sources.
       The appropriate phase pattern 𝚽 (see Figure 3.10) is displayed on the SLM located in
the Fourier plane of the microscope and illuminated by a plane wave. We use the iterative
Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm65, which is one of the most common numerical techniques to
calculate . As shown in Figure 3.7, this pattern is projected by lens L1, which acts as a Fourier
transformer, and imaged in an intermediate plane where a low-pass spatial filter mask cancels

                                                94


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

unwanted higher diffraction orders and zero-order diffraction peak. After the lens L2 and the
microscope objective, the desired intensity pattern 𝐈 (see Figure 3.10) is projected in the
substrate plane and generates the temperature distribution ∆𝐓 ′ (see Figure 3.10). Within the
chosen domain of interest D, this algorithm provides the targeted temperature map (∆𝐓 ′ = ∆𝐓).
One should note, however, that since the temperature distribution is not constrained outside of
                                  1
D, temperature freely decays in 𝑟 due to thermal diffusion outside of D.

       Moreover, since we only use heat sources, and no cooling sources (all values in the 𝐐
                                                                                               1
vector are strictly positive), some desired shapes with temperature gradients steeper than the 𝑟

decay imposed by diffusion are impossible to reproduce155. Finally, we must note that the
method is only adapted to 2D temperature control. A temperature decay also appears along the
vertical z-direction away from the targeted plane, and depends on z and on the lateral size of
the target155, but is not controlled in the present configuration.

   3.4.4. Temperature imaging using wavefront sensing

       To test the reliability of the heating result, we used a wavefront-imaging-based
temperature imaging method to measure and validate the temperature variation maps caused by
nanoscale heating sources. This method was originally proposed by Serge Monneret and first
demonstrated by Guillaume Baffou and Pierre Bon in 2012103. The refractive index of most
materials is temperature-dependent. As shown in Figure 3.11(a), temperature changes in the
medium surrounding the NPs will therefore cause refractive index variations, which can be
measured to deduce temperature. To probe the refractive index, we use a plane wave at a
wavelength away from the NP resonance, for which the NP carpet is mostly transparent. The
thermally-induced refractive index variations modify this plane wavefront and leave a
fingerprint of the temperature distribution. We use a high-resolution wavefront sensor (SID4,
Phasics) to analyse this perturbated wavefront, from which we deduce the temperature using a
dedicated calculation.




                                                95


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 3.11 Temperature imaging using wavefront sensing. (a) In the absence of excitation
light, the probe beam has no thermally-induced wavefront distortion. This is considered as the
“reference” wavefront. Note that the static refractive effects induced by the particles and the
optics are neglected in this scheme. (b) While the sample is illuminated by light at the plasmonic
resonant frequency, the increase of temperature in the medium changes the local optical
refractive index. A plane wave that is out of resonance with the NPs will be deformed by the
local variation of the refractive index. This phase-shift contains temperature information.

    3.4.4.1. Thermo-optical effects

       The main principle behind this thermometry method is the thermo-optical effect. The
refractive index of most materials is temperature-dependent, and the relation can be described
by a Taylor expansion of the refractive index with temperature168:

                                                    𝜕𝑛
                         𝑛(𝑇) = 𝑛(𝑇0 ) + (𝑇 − 𝑇0 ) ∙   (𝑇 ) + ⋯
                                                    𝜕𝑇 0
                                          (𝑇 − 𝑇0 )𝑚 𝜕 𝑚 𝑛                        Equation 3.13
                                        +            ∙ 𝑚 (𝑇0 ) + 𝜊(𝑇 𝑚 )
                                             𝑚!       𝜕𝑇

       In our experiment, we use glycerol as the thermo-responsive liquid to increase the
thermo-optical effect and improve the signal to noise ratio of the measurements. For
temperature rises below typ. 60°C, we can limit ourselves to the first term of the Taylor
Series169. This linear approximation is commonly used with most materials, over limited (a few
tens of K) temperature ranges:

                                                          𝜕𝑛
                            𝑛(𝑇) = 𝑛(𝑇0 ) + (𝑇 − 𝑇0 ) ∙      (𝑇 )                 Equation 3.14
                                                          𝜕𝑇 0


                                               96


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

Thus, we have:
                                                    𝑑𝑛
                            𝛥𝑛 = 𝑛(𝑇) − 𝑛(𝑇0 ) ≈ 𝑑𝑇 (𝑇0 ) ∙ 𝛥𝑇,                   Equation 3.15

with 𝛥𝑇 = 𝑇 − 𝑇0 . In order to describe the wavefront perturbation caused by the temperature
rise in the sample, we need to apply Equation 3.15 to a 3-dimensional space. While the probing
beam passes through the heated region, the refractive index variation in the medium will induce
an Optical Path Difference (OPD), as illustrated in Figure 3.11(a). This OPD is the integral of
the refractive index change 𝛥𝑛 along the optical path. It can be measured in one plane after
propagating through the sample.
       To further simplify the demonstration, we first consider the case of a single nano-heater
and consider it as a point source. In cylindrical coordinates, 𝜌 being the radial coordinate, with
a z-axis corresponding to the optical axis, as shown in Figure 3.12, the wavefront perturbation
OPD(𝜌) reads:
                                              +∞

                                  𝑂𝑃𝐷(𝜌) = ∫ 𝛥𝑛(𝜌, 𝑧)𝑑𝑧                           Equation 3.16
                                             −∞

It is worth mentioning that experimentally, while the probe wave propagates through the
                                                                                     𝑑𝑛
sample, it accumulates a thermo-optically-induced OPD in the glass substrate170 (𝑑𝑇 = 3 .10-6
                                                                 𝑑𝑛
K-1) and in a thin layer (thickness ℎ = 1 mm) of glycerol169 (𝑑𝑇 = -2.3 .10-4 K-1). Light then
                   𝑑𝑛
propagates in air (𝑑𝑇 = -0.7 10-8 K-1), or immersion media (water, oil) before it reaches the

objective, but the fast 1/z longitudinal decay of temperature means that their contribution to the
thermo-optical OPD is negligible. In the sample itself, considering the large difference between
the thermo-optical coefficients (2 orders of magnitude), the wavefront distortion in glass is
negligible, and we can safely assume that only the glycerol layer contributes to the thermo-
optical OPD.




         Figure 3.12 Coordinates for calculating the wavefront perturbation OPD(𝜌)
                                               97


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       Relating the heating and thermo-optical terms from Equation 3.11, Equation 3.15 and
Equation 3.16, we have:


                                         ℎ
                                             𝑑𝑛           𝑄
                             𝑂𝑃𝐷(𝜌) = ∫         (𝑇0 )              𝑑𝑧
                                             𝑑𝑇       4𝜋𝜅√𝜌2 + 𝑧 2
                                         0
                                                                                   Equation 3.17
                                     𝑄 𝑑𝑛
                                  =       (𝑇 ). sinh−1(ℎ⁄𝜌)
                                    4𝜋𝜅 𝑑𝑇 0
                                             = 𝑄. 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷

                   1 𝑑𝑛
with 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 (𝜌) =            (𝑇0 )sinh−1(ℎ⁄𝜌) and 𝑄 the point heat source term. Since the heat source
                  4𝜋𝜅 𝑑𝑇

is defined by a Dirac distribution in the point source approximation, the 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 function
corresponds to the Green’s function for the thermal OPD distribution. Experimentally, the
particles are in contact with a glass slide on one side, and immersed in a liquid on the other. In
this case, the thermal conductivity to be considered is the mean value between that of glass
𝜅𝑔𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 and liquid 𝜅𝑙𝑖𝑞 : 𝜅 = (𝜅𝑔𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 + 𝜅𝑙𝑖𝑞 )⁄2.104
       Now that we have solved the thermo-optical problem for a point source, any set of heat
sources distributed in a 2D plane with a distribution map 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) can also be modelled. The
resulting OPD is then the convolution 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) with Green’s function for the optical path
difference, 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 . If we change to a Cartesian coordinate system, and under the linear
approximation of Equation 3.15 while the temperature is under 60°C, the 𝑂𝑃𝐷(𝑥, 𝑦) caused by
a heat source distribution 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) writes:



                  𝑂𝑃𝐷(𝑥, 𝑦) = ∬ 𝑄(𝑥0 , 𝑦0 )𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 (𝑥 − 𝑥0 , 𝑦 − 𝑦0 )𝑑𝑥0 d𝑦0
                                                                                   Equation 3.18
                                   = 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) ∗ 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 (𝑥, 𝑦)


Equation 3.18 clearly shows that 𝑂𝑃𝐷(𝑥, 𝑦) is the convolution of 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦).with 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 (𝑥, 𝑦).
Therefore, the heat source distribution 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) can be determined by a deconvolution. An
optical measurement of wavefront perturbations can therefore give access to the heat source
term, and therefore, as shown below, to the temperature.




                                                   98


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

    3.4.4.2. Wavefront sensing

       We use a shearing interferometry-based wavefront sensor (Phasics, SID4 171,172) in order
to obtain the perturbation 𝑂𝑃𝐷(𝑥, 𝑦)103. In Figure 3.7, the optical path corresponding to this
measurement arm is coloured in violet. The sample is illuminated by a halogen lamp spectrally
filtered around λ = 407nm (Δλ = 40 nm), a wavelength at which the absorption by gold
nanoparticles is much lower than at resonance (532 nm). With a total power of the order of the
mW, this illumination can be safely assumed to be thermally non-perturbative. We use a Köhler
illumination with a closed aperture diaphragm to maximize the spatial coherence and illuminate
the sample with a quasi-plane wave. However, wavefront distortions in the setup need to be
considered: a first reference phase image is acquired before any heating is applied Figure
3.11(b), and the measured wavefront is subtracted from the subsequent acquisitions in order to
extract the thermally-induced wavefront distortions.

    3.4.4.3. Retrieving temperature from wavefront images

       In the previous two sections, we have deduced the relation between wavefront distortion
and explained the experimental way to acquire wavefront images (OPD image). Now we show
how to retrieve the temperature map out of the wavefront images numerically.
       Transforming Equation 3.18 in the Fourier space, we have:


                 𝑇𝐹(𝑂𝑃𝐷)(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ) = 𝑇𝐹(𝑄)(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ) ∙ 𝑇𝐹(𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 )(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ).        Equation 3.19


Theoretically, once the OPD image is acquired by the wavefront sensor, one can get the heat
source distribution image in the Fourier space by 𝑇𝐹(𝑄)(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ) = 𝑇𝐹(𝑂𝑃𝐷)(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 )/
𝑇𝐹(𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 )(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ). However, in practice, the noises will be amplified when the value of
Green’s function 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 approaches zero. For this reason, we apply a filtering method that has
been implemented by Baffou et al.103 to regulate these noises. The idea is to use an intermediate
function 𝐺̅ which consists of a Tikhonov factor 𝛼 𝑇 , as defined by the following relation:


                       1              1                           1
                               =                   ∙             𝛼𝑇
                    ̅
                   𝐺 (𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ) 𝑇𝐹(𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 )(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ) 1 +                            Equation 3.20
                                                                               2
                                                          |𝑇𝐹(𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 )(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 )|




                                                99


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

The Tikhonov factor 𝛼 𝑇 > 0 is defined empirically for each measurement. Using this
                       1
regulation, we get 𝐺̅ (𝑣         ≈ 1/𝑇𝐹(𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 )(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ) when the value of 𝑇𝐹(𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 )(𝑣𝑥 , 𝑣𝑦 ) is large
                       𝑥 ,𝑣𝑦 )


enough compared to 𝛼 𝑇 , and 0 when it’s not the case, which means that noise amplification is
avoided. By deconvolution of the measured optical path difference 𝑂𝑃𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 , we then have:


                                                     𝑇𝐹(𝑂𝑃𝐷𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑢𝑟𝑒 )
                                 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) ≈ 𝑇𝐹 −1 [                   ] (𝑥, 𝑦).         Equation 3.21
                                                           𝐺̅


From the 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) map and Equation 3.11 we can retrieve the temperature increase map
∆𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦):


                                       ∆𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑄(𝑥, 𝑦) ∗ 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇                       Equation 3.22

This wavefront-sensing-based system can provide quick access (10 fps) to the temperature
distribution in the sample, with a spatial resolution limited by both diffraction (λ/NA under
spatially coherent illumination) and deconvolution inaccuracies. The phase resolution of the
wavefront sensor for a single camera frame is 2 nm, which translates into a temperature
resolution of the order of 1K and can be improved at the expense of temporal resolution upon
averaging.




                                                       100


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


3.5. Results

  3.5.1. Uniform temperature increase control




Figure 3.13 Photothermal stimulation shaping and thermal imaging process. (a) Desired
temperature increase pattern; Two Heat Source Density maps are compared: (b-e) correspond
to the case of uniform illumination while (f-i) correspond to the case of a calculated
illumination (b,f) applied HSD; (c,g) Experimental reflectance images of light distribution in
the sample plane; (d,h) OPDs measured by wavefront sensing; (e,i) temperature increase
distributions retrieved from OPD; (j) Comparison of the temperature increase profiles. Scale
bar: 20 µm.

       In order to illustrate the possibilities of the method for shaping temperature, we start by
imposing either a homogeneous HSD (Figure 3.13(b)) or a precalculated HSD (Figure 3.13(f))
leading to a uniform temperature (Figure 3.13(a)) over a square region of 40 µm × 40 µm. After
calculating and displaying the appropriate phase pattern on the SLM, a uniform light intensity
I = 8 µW.µm-2 is sent onto the sample in this square region (Figure 3.13(c)) and constitutes the


                                              101


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

HSD (note the speckling effect due to the coherent laser source). As shown in Figure 3.13(b-
e), an uniform illumination HSD (Figure 3.13(b-c)) does not yield a uniform temperature
distribution since collective effects induced by heat diffusion lead to higher temperatures at the
centre than on the edges of the square (Figure 3.13(e)). The orange profile in Figure 3.13(j)
clearly shows the bell-shaped thermal response of the system, with a temperature increase
varying between 29.4 K and 36.3 K over the heated region. As discussed above, HSD
engineering can compensate for this effect. Figure 3.13(f,g) show the calculated and
experimental HSDs which yield a constant temperature rise ∆𝑇 over the square region when
imposing I ≤ I0 at any position. As expected, the highest HSD is found near the edges, where
lateral heat dissipation is strongest. The resulting temperature distribution (Figure 3.13(i,j))
reaches the constant targeted value (∆𝑇 = 25 K) within the designated square region (standard
deviation: 1.3 K). In both cases (uniform HSD and uniform ∆𝑇), the absolute temperatures
profiles are in good agreement with the expected values.

   3.5.2. Temperature control with different locations and values




Figure 3.14 Temperature control at different locations and values. (a,d,g) Desired temperature
increase distribution; (b,e,h) Calculated HSD; (c,f,i) experimental temperature increase
images retrieved from wavefront measurements.

       A major advantage of temperature shaping using a SLM is that patterns can be arbitrarily
reconfigured in both time and space. Quantitative temperature shaping is illustrated in Figure

                                               102


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

3.14, where arbitrary temperature targets ∆𝑇 of 20K or 10K are chosen within domains of
variable shapes (Figure 3.14 (a,d,g)). The corresponding HSD (Figure 3.14(b,e,h)) and the
phase pattern to display on the SLM are calculated using the algorithm described above. After
projection on the plasmonic substrate, wavefront measurements yield the temperature images
(Figure 3.14(c,f,i)). Heat spreading around the microstructures is clearly visible, particularly in
central regions where the distance between heat sources is lower, but the temperature in the
targeted regions is homogeneous and quantitatively reaches the desired values within a 15%
error, mostly due to NPs sample absorption inhomogeneities, phase measurement noise and
deconvolution noise. This shows that single-shot substrate illumination with the appropriate
HSD can produce arbitrarily localized temperature rises.
       The reduction of the heated area also has the advantage of giving access to faster thermal
dynamics, which can typically reach the millisecond range. Indeed, the characteristic time scale
𝜏 for generating a stable 2D temperature distribution depends on the typical length 𝑙𝑐 of the
pattern as follows:


                                                𝑙𝑐 2
                                           𝜏=                                     Equation 3.23
                                                4𝐷

with 𝐷 = 9.2 .10-4 cm2s-1 the thermal diffusivity of glycerol173 and 𝐷 = 3.4 .10-3 cm2s-1 that of
glass, we can assume that glass drives the lateral thermal spread 174. Considering a square with
side length 𝑙𝑐 = 10 µm, the system therefore reaches a stable temperature profile extremely
quickly, within approximately 𝜏 = 70 µs. The rise time and fall time of the SLM we use, 10 and
25 ms respectively, are much longer than 𝜏, and are therefore the main temporal limitation here.
This can be improved relatively easily using kHz frame rate SLMs which are now available175.




                                                103


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   3.5.3. Towards biological application: selective heating at sub-neuron scale




Figure 3.15 Selective heating of different parts of a cultured hippocampal neuron. (a) Confocal
fluorescence images of a hippocampus neuron (light green: neuron staining, MAP2). The
dashes outline the area of interest, i.e. the neuron. (b,e) Outline of the neuron, with targeted
heating areas highlighted in yellow; (c,f) Calculated HSD to heat these areas. (d,g)
Experimental temperature increase distribution and outline of the neuron position.

       One of the main applications envisioned for this temperature shaping technique lies in
the field of biology, where temperature is an essential parameter. In the context of 2P
optogenetics, photo-induced local temperature rises could influence neuronal activity: suppress
spiking114, generate action potentials176, drive the growth of neurites177 and so on, which should
be carefully evaluated. In this section, we show, as a proof of principle, the potential of the
reconfigurable temperature control technique that we developed to address these problems.
       Here, we propose a methodology combining temperature shaping with fluorescence
imaging to thermally target a given population of cells or organelles of interest. Since
fluorescence staining is a ubiquitous tool providing excellent specificity, it gives access to
biological regions of interest in which local, precise and dynamic temperature control can be
performed. The size and shape of the neuron were derived from the image Figure 3.15(a), using
neuron staining (MAP2, in green). Note that the red and blue channels in Figure 3.15(a), which
represent cytoskeleton (Alpha tubulin) and presynaptic (synuclein) tagging, respectively, were
not used here. As shown in Figure 3.15(b,e), the outlines of this image were used to define the
thermal stimulation of the substrate with the shape of the soma (Figure 3.15(b-d)) or a dendrite
(Figure 3.15(e-g)). Because the noise of the wavefront imaging limits the sensibility for short
exposure times, we used a relatively high-power thermal stimulation for clarity, ∆T = 10K.


                                               104


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

However, since this heating varies linearly with power, lower laser power can easily be applied
to deliver more realistic and precise ∆T values (after a power-∆T calibration), which can be
applied within millisecond-scale times, and are therefore well adapted to biological
investigations.

   3.5.4. Discussion on homogeneity and reliability

    3.5.4.1. Influence of speckle




Figure 3.16 2D Inhomogeneity caused by speckle. (a) Temperature rise cross-sections
calculated in the presence of speckle distributions associated to NA= 0.2 (green) and 1.2 (red),
and in the absence of speckle in the illumination (black dashes). (b) Evolution of the speckle-
induced spatial noise with NA, showing the effect of speckle grain-size decrease with NA.

       Since a coherent source is used to create our HSDs, the intensity patterns in Figure
3.13(c) and g are clearly affected by speckle. Whether this speckle in turn induces
inhomogeneity in the temperature distribution is an important question, driven in part by the
size of the speckle grain, which varies as λ /NA where NA is the numerical aperture used to
project the pattern. Due to the limited spatial and thermal resolution of the wavefront analyser,
this subtle effect is difficult to characterize experimentally. To predict these inhomogeneities,
we use the fact that the Gerchberg-Saxton algorithm imposes the intensity (that of the target
pattern), but leaves the phase (which is displayed on the SLM) as a free parameter, thus
producing after Fourier transformation a speckle pattern representative of the experimental one
for a given NA. Figure 3.16(a) shows temperature profiles obtained by convolving the Fourier
transform103 of Gerchberg-Saxton solutions for various NA values with the thermal Green’s
function 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 , thus producing realistic, speckle-affected temperature profiles. For a low NA =

                                              105


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

                                                                                                 𝜎∆𝑇
0.2 (green line), local temperature inhomogeneities are clearly visible, with a relative error   ∆𝑇

= 2% with respect to the targeted temperature rise ∆𝑇. However, these relative variations
quickly fall below 1% and become negligible in practice for NA > 0.5, as shown in Figure
3.16(b). In our experiment, we used microscope objectives with NA = 0.85 (Olympus,
UPlanSApo, 20x) or NA = 1.42 (Olympus, oil immersion Plan Apo N 60x) to minimize this
effect. Several strategies can be proposed to reduce speckle and improve temperature
homogeneity. Experimentally, speckle scrambling using e.g. a rotating diffuser is of course
possible if time-resolution is not an issue. Alternatively, it is possible to improve the Gerchberg-
Saxton algorithm by removing optical vortices responsible for intensity zeros. Such a control
of both phase and intensity at the sample requires modulating both phase and amplitude in the
Fourier plane. In practice, however, speckle control is achieved either at the expense of critical
optical power losses178, or of experimental complexity179.

    3.5.4.2. Homogeneity in 3D




Figure 3.17 3D temperature distribution and temperature homogeneity for a homogeneous
(a,b,c) and pre-compensated illumination (d,e,f). (a,d) Temperature increase map in the xy-
plane (z=0); (b,e) Cross-section of the temperature increase map in the xz-plane (y=0). The
white dashed lines represent the dimension of the assumed cylindrical object (e stands for the
thickness and r for the radius of the cylinder). (c,f) Relative standard deviation of ΔT in the
cylindrical volume. For both illuminations, the total laser power is the same.


                                                106


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       In the previous sections, we essentially focused on the optimization of the lateral (x, y)
temperature increase map. However, along the longitudinal (z) direction, there is also clearly a
temperature distribution. This can be important in cases where e.g. a relatively thick adherent
cell body needs to be brought to a constant temperature. While T(z) cannot be measured using
the OPD method, we propose to model it. Here we report simulation results describing the 3D
temperature distribution generated by heating an absorbing nanoparticles layer with a
homogenous (Figure 3.17(a-c)) and thermally pre-compensated illumination (Figure 3.17(a-c)).
We consider a disk shape target area with radius 𝑟. For a homogeneous illumination, the
temperature distribution in the nanoparticle plane (𝑧 = 0) is not homogeneous (see Figure
3.17(a)). As described in the main text, it is however possible to calculate an illumination
pattern leading to a uniform temperature distribution in the plane 𝑧 = 0 (see Figure 3.17(d)).
       Figure 3.17(b,e) show respectively the temperature distributions along the propagation
direction of the heating beam (𝑧-direction) for a homogeneous (b) and pre-compensated (e)
illumination. In both cases, temperature decreases away from the heating plane. Let us now
estimate the temperature homogeneity inside a cylindrical volumetric object with radius 𝑟 and
thickness 𝑒, represented by a dashed line rectangle in Figure 3.17(b,e). To this aim, we defined
                                       𝛥𝑇 𝜎
the Relative Standard Deviation: RSD= 𝛥𝑇             , with 𝜎𝛥𝑇 the standard deviation and 𝛥𝑇𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛
                                              𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛

the average temperature increase inside the cylindrical volume. Figure 3.17(c,f) show the
temperature inhomogeneity inside cylinders of variable radii 𝑟 (horizontal axis) and thicknesses
𝑒 (vertical axis). Here, we assume 𝑒 < 𝑟, since this is typically the case for adherent culture
cells which are relatively flat objects180. For any value of 𝑒 and 𝑟 in the tested range, the values
of the RSD, i.e. the temperature inhomogeneity, is larger in Figure 3.17(c) than in Figure
3.17(f): the pre-compensated illumination always provides a better temperature homogeneity
than the non-compensated case. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that Figure 3.17(f) also
shows that RSD decreases: the 3D temperature homogeneity improves with the size of the
heated region. However, this reduces the lateral spatial resolution of the thermal targeting as
spurious heating can potentially be induced in the surrounding structures.

    3.5.4.3. Confinement in 3D - comparison with direct IR laser beam heating

       As discussed earlier, several methods for local heating coexist. One of the most
straightforward and efficient methods is probably to heat water at wavelengths which it absorbs,
i.e. in the infrared or near-infrared range. In this section, we compare the 3D temperature


                                               107


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

distribution induced by an IR beam focused in water with the one induced when illuminating
an absorbing nanoparticle layer.
       In this study, we considered a gaussian NIR beam (λ0 =1.8 µm as in ref181) focused in
water, with a low numerical aperture, in order to generate a 15µm diameter spot (FWHM) at
the sample plane (z=0, see Figure 3.18(a)). For the sake of simplicity, we considered a
homogenous medium having the thermal and optical properties of water, and we neglected the
intensity depletion of the heating beam during its propagation. Figure 3.18(b) shows the
intensity distribution of the focused beam along the propagation direction (z-direction). The
                                                                           𝜋.𝐹𝑊𝐻𝑀2
large axial extension of the focal volume is clearly visible: 𝐿𝑧 = 2𝑧𝑟 =                 ≈ 700µ𝑚,
                                                                           (λ0 /n).𝑙𝑛2

where 𝑧𝑟 stands for the Rayleigh length and n=1.31 the refractive index of water at λ0 .




                                              108


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 3.18 Comparison of temperature confinement under focused infrared beam or pre-
compensated illumination. (a) Intensity map of a focused infrared beam in the z=0 plane of best
focusing. (b) Cross-section of the beam intensity distribution (FWHM=15µm) in the xy-plane
(y=0). (c) Temperature map induced by a gaussian beam in the focal plane (z=0) and d) Cross-
section of the temperature increase in the xz-plane (y=0). (e) Temperature increase map in the
XY-plane of an absorbing nanoparticle layer (z=0) heated by a pre-compensated illumination
leading to a 15 µm diameter homogeneous temperature disk; (f) Cross-section of the

                                             109


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

temperature increase map in the xz-plane (y=0). (g) Temperature increase profiles along the
x-direction (y=0, z=0).

       Water absorption of the NIR light (α = 8 cm-1 at λ0 ) along the beam propagation then
results in a temperature increase that can be calculated by convolving the 3D heat source
distribution with the 3D thermal Green’s function 𝐺𝑇𝑆𝑇 . Figure 3.18(c,d) show, respectively, the
resulting temperature distribution in the xy-plane (z=0) and the xy-plane (y=0). This volumetric
absorption leads to a broad distribution of temperature increase, particularly along the z-axis.
       For comparison, we also simulated the 3D temperature distribution generated when
illuminating an absorbing layer of nanoparticles located at z=0. Here, we considered a pre-
compensated illumination leading to a 15 µm diameter homogeneous temperature disk (same
size as the FWHM diameter of the Gaussian beam, see Figure 3.18(e,f). In this case, the
temperature is much more confined, not only axially but also laterally. This effect can be clearly
seen in Figure 3.18(g), where the temperature profiles in the xy-plane are compared (taken
along the dashed lines in Figure 3.18(c,d). This lateral and vertical confinement is particularly
important in biological applications as it reduces spurious thermal excitation of the surrounding
structures (other cells, for instance) and thus provides a better spatial resolution on the thermal
targeting.




                                               110


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


3.6. Conclusion

       Combining wavefront engineering and thermo-plasmonics, we proposed and
demonstrated a method to generate microscale reconfigurable temperature distributions in
chosen domains of space. Using a spatial light modulator, we apply a Heat Source Density
(HSD) which is calculated to compensate the heat diffusion effects within this domain and
obtain the desired temperature profile. We experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of the
procedure by imaging the temperature with micrometre resolution using a method based on
wavefront-sensing.
       We show as proof of principle that this technique has the potential to create heat
stimulation targeting different parts of a neuron. If we used adherent neuron cells on a NP
substrate, this reconfigurable temperature control technique would allow to select different
zones of interest in a neuron, or to create homogeneous temperature rises in a ~10µm thick (z-
direction) region above the substrate. As the temperature control setup is quite compact, it is
possible to observe at the same time the neuron activities through patch-clamp, calcium imaging
or voltage imaging, allowing the observation of electrophysiological responses to thermal
stimulation.
                                                                                                1
       There are clearly limitations to the method: temperature gradients steeper than the
                                                                                                𝑟

imposed by heat diffusion are not achievable without using negative heat sources, i.e. local
cooling. For similar reasons, the temperature can only be driven in limited domains of space,
                          1
and will be imposed by 𝑟 diffusion, collective effects (i.e. other neighbouring heat sources), and

boundary conditions outside of the domain. Although limited to such microscale domains,
overcoming thermal diffusion by pre-engineering thermal sources promises a wide range of
applications, for which reconfigurable, fast and accurate temperature shaping is necessary. This
includes not only biological applications (e.g. photoinduced thermal perturbation, metabolism
stimulation, thermogenetic), but also applications in physics (e.g. phase changes, microscale
thermal phenomena), microfluidics and chemistry, where thermal gradients are crucial to drive
e.g. reaction kinetics.


The results presented in this chapter have been published in:

Reconfigurable Temperature Control at the Microscale by Light Shaping

ACS Photonics 2019 6 (2), 422-428, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.8b01354


                                               111


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


Chapter 4
Tunable Thermal ‘SmartLenses’: Towards Multiplane
Imaging of Neural Activities

Summary

  4.1.   Introduction                                                     113
  4.2.   Background: 3D neuronal imaging                                  114
    4.2.1.   Monitoring neural activities                                 114
    4.2.2.   Sequential imaging-based techniques                          115
    4.2.3.   Parallel imaging-based techniques                            117
  4.3.   Wavefront engineering SmartLenses using thermo-optical effects   120
    4.3.1.   Overview of the SmartLens concept                            120
    4.3.2.   SmartLenses array for simultaneous multiplane imaging        121
    4.3.3.   SmartLens model and validation                               122
    4.3.4.   Dynamic focal range                                          124
  4.4.   Development of a multiplane imaging fluorescence microscope      126
    4.4.1.   Overview of the setup                                        126
    4.4.2.   Modelling and measurement of the axial range                 127
    4.4.3.   PSF characterization                                         129
  4.5.   Preliminary results on a Zebrafish                               132
  4.6.   Discussion                                                       136
  4.7.   Conclusion                                                       138




                                              112


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


4.1. Introduction

       We have seen in the previous chapter (see Section 3.4.4.1) that temperature variations
in a material locally change its optical refractive index. A light beam passing through a given
material thus experiences a wavefront distortion (or phase-shift) which directly depends on the
temperature distribution within the material. We also have seen that the temperature distribution
can be precisely shaped at the microscale by pre-compensating heat diffusion. Combining these
two concepts, it clearly appears that one can precisely engineer an optical wavefront by shaping
the temperature within a thermo-optical material.
       Based on this principle, we will introduce in this chapter a novel concept of tunable
micro-optics called SmartLens (SL). The method, developed in close collaboration with the
group of Romain Quidant (ETH Zurich), exploits electrically-induced thermal phase-shifts at
the microscale. We will see that the Heat Source Distribution (HSD) generated by engineered
microresistors can be optimised to produce free-form tunable wavefront distortions.
Individually or in arrays, the SmartLens technique can generate complex functions based on
either pure, or a combination of Zernike polynomials, including lenses or aberration correctors
of electrically-tunable magnitude. This technology could offer a broad range of potential
applications, especially in microscopy.
       As this project shares very similar physics with the temperature shaping technique and
is of particular interest to the microscopy of neuronal circuits, I have participated in the
characterisation and application of this technology in two aspects:

-   characterisation of the wavefront engineering performance: focus tuning and Bessel beam
    generation (published in ref182);
-   new development based on an array of SmartLenses: simultaneous in vivo multiplane
    fluorescence imaging to monitor brain activity in 3D.

This chapter focuses on the multiplane imaging part, and we present the Bessel beam generation
in Annex 3.




                                              113


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


4.2. Background: 3D neuronal imaging

   4.2.1. Monitoring neural activities

       In the last decades, extensive efforts have been made to develop fluorescent reporters of
neuronal activity to decipher the neural code under optical microscopes. Genetics and protein
engineering have provided us with a powerful tool — optogenetics. These techniques are
arguably one of the major breakthroughs of the beginning of the 21st century. Optogenetics not
only provide access to the optical activation of neurons (as described in Section 1.1.2) but also
enables converting electrical or chemical activities in neuron into fluorescence signals183,
opening a new horizon for optical investigation of the brain. Among the advantages of using
fluorescence compared to electrodes to detect neuron activities, one can mention reduced
invasiveness, versatility, and the possibility to investigate a large population of neurons at once
on living animals. Figure 4.1(a) shows an example (image acquired by Giulia Faini, post-doc
in the group of F. Del Bene) of a wide-field fluorescence image of neuron in living Zebrafish
larvae expressing the widely use GcaMP, a genetically encoded calcium indicator (GECI).
These kind of indicators are the most widely used fluorescent proteins that respond to the
binding of Ca2+. Because an influx of Ca2+ ions always accompanies the generation of action
potentials in neurons, the calcium indicators can thus monitor neurons’ firing. Besides, there is
another type of indicator – genetically encoded voltage indicator (GEVI), protein or chemical
compounds whose fluorescence varies with the electrical activities of the neurons, which is
even more powerful as it provides faster response time to sub-millisecond. Figure 4.1(b) shows,
in another case, the comparison of calcium imaging signal and voltage imaging signal at the
same region of interest, while three action potentials were evoked by direct current injection
into the cell body. The faster response of GEVI and the faster electrical activity dynamic show
clear advantages in time resolution, almost comparable to electrical recording.




                                               114


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 4.1 (a) Widefield fluorescence imaging of a zebrafish larva brain (Danio rerio)
expressing Gcamp6s – courtesy of Giulia Faini, Institut de la Vision. Scale bar: 50 µm. (b) (in
another case) Voltage and calcium time-trace from the same region of interest on a basal
dendrite of layer 5 cortical pyramidal neuron (adapted from ref184). In this illustrative example,
three action potentials were evoked by direct current injection into the cell body.

       Optical imaging of neuronal activity using Ca2+ or voltage indicators requires
developing dedicated optical imaging techniques to detect fluorescent signals from multiple
targets with cellular resolution deep in living tissue. In particular, neuronal networks have
complex and wide three-dimensional structures. It’s thus critical to achieve 3D images and
detect activities over cellular structures located at different depths. Additionally, resolving
spiking activity requires ms temporal resolution (Figure 4.1(b))..
       In order to tackle these challenges, several methods have been proposed to achieve
volumetric acquisitions over large areas without compromising the acquisition speed or the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). These methods can be roughly classified into two groups: (i)
sequential (or scanning) imaging techniques, in which structures at different depths are imaged
quickly one after the other, systematically requiring a delay between subsequent measurements
at the same point; (ii) parallel imaging techniques which can image targets at different depths
simultaneously. We will discuss the two types of approaches in the following two sections,
giving a few examples in a non-exhaustive list.

   4.2.2. Sequential imaging-based techniques

       In this scheme, most of the instrumental efforts are focused towards the optimization of
scanning delays. Increasing the frame rate is, of course, useful in itself, but it is even more
essential in order to avoid missing short transient events occurring between frames.

                                               115


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       Piezo-controlled objectives and electrically tunable lens (ETL): ): In two-photon
microscopy or any other laser scanning microscopy, those are the most prevalent Z-scanners in
combination with galvanometric mirrors (<10 fps) or resonant XY-scanners (>30 fps)185. Piezo-
controlled objectives have refocusing ranges of ~ 400 µm, with step and settling times186 shorter
than 20 ms. ETLs have a faster settling time (<10 ms)187, but still they enable only a limited
number of planes if combined with Ca2+ imaging and lack the temporal resolution for
multiplane voltage imaging.
       Spatial Light Modulator (SLM): SLM is a ubiquitous wavefront shaping technique
that can be used to obtain fast focus scanning elements as well as scanless parallel elements.
Among the various wavefront engineering techniques, liquid-crystal spatial light modulators
(LC-SLMs) are the gold standard for dynamic spatial phase control of wavefronts with a high
spatial resolution. They can switch focus across > 500 µm while reducing the transition time
between different illumination depths into < 3 ms by applying different digital phase masks on
the wavefront188. Moreover, SLMs are compatible with beam multiplexing and adaptive optics
to correct the aberration from the optical system and sample. However, they are highly
chromatic since they work in a diffractive regime.
       Ultrasound / TAG Lens: Ultrasound lens, or acoustic gradient index of refraction
(TAG) lens, is an alternative strategy for high-speed scanning. As opposed to other scanners
whose frames are taken from xy-planes, each frame of ultrasound/TAG Lens scanners is taken
along yz-planes with a continuous resonance frequency > 450 kHz in the Z direction. To avoid
image distortions caused by oscillation instabilities, it needs a phase-locked loop. Eventually,
the frame rate can typically189 reach ~1 kHz.
       Random access multiphoton (RAMP) microscopy: This method combines
multiphoton    excitation   with   an   inertial   free   scanning   mechanism—acousto-optic
deflectors(AODs). While using two orthogonal AODs (for X and Y direction), one can steer a
multiphoton excitation laser beam in an inertia-free manner, enabling the multiphoton
excitation volume to be laterally repositioned to only locations of interest within the
microscope’s specimen plane with very short latency190 (~15µs). It dramatically reduces the
number of voxels that need to be sampled. Recording in vivo neuronal activities in a
500µm×500µm plane up to depths of ~500µm at ~160Hz was realised; combining with piezo
axial scanning, 3Hz volume rate is achievable to observe thousands of neurons in large V-FOVs
(500µm×500µm×500µm) for single-cell resolution in the mouse neocortex191. It can also be
combined with an acousto-optic lens to perform 3D random-access multiphoton points
measurements at 35–50 kHz. However, the major limitation of AODs based devices is that they

                                                116


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

cannot perform full-frame continuous line scanning away from the natural focal plane of the
objective, which needs to be overcome for in vivo imaging192.
        Light-sheet microscope: Light-sheet microscopy can significantly increase time
resolution using full-field (scanning-free) imaging along the XY direction. It uses a thin sheet
of light projected into the sample from the side so that only a 2D section of the sample is
illuminated, providing, therefore, micrometric optical sectioning. For relatively transparent
samples that are not limited by light scattering effects, light-sheet microscopy is very efficient
for the functional mapping of circuits across large volumes in (e.g.) transparent samples such
as worms, Zebrafish and Drosophila larvae. In fluorophore-labelled samples, the emitted
fluorescence signal from one plane is imaged along the direction orthogonal to the light sheet,
and the plane of the light sheet is scanned along the z-direction. The volumetric recording of
light-sheet scanning can reach >10 vol/s (depending on the size and resolution).176,193,194
        In general, those sequential (scanning) approaches for 3D imaging share the following
features:
-   They achieve high resolution in 3D imaging, even deep in living tissue when combined with
    2P excitation;
-   However, being sequential approaches, they intrinsically suffer from loss of speed. For
    instance, for the same dwell time per voxel (same acquisition time spent in each location),
                                                                               1
    the acquisition rate f is divided by the number of planes Nplane: 𝑓 ∝ 𝑁           . This limit the
                                                                              𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑒

    overall speed achievable.

    4.2.3. Parallel imaging-based techniques

        Multiplexed point-scanning microscopy: Instead of increasing the scanning speed, an
alternative approach is to increase (multiplex) the number of laser beams, a major route towards
parallel imaging. This can be realised in several ways. For example, temporal multiplexing195
separates nanosecond pulse trains into several copies, interleaved in intervals longer than the
fluorescence lifetime. These temporally separated beams scan the different fields of views or
depths simultaneously. Their fluorescent signals can be distinguished using the time interval
separation. The number of multiplexed plane is, however, limited by the fluorescence decay
time. Spatial multiplexing includes lateral approaches that196 use N beams to scan N lateral
regions simultaneously and N PMTs (multianode PMTs) to detect each emission, respectively.
It also includes axial approaches that use computational algorithms to extract multiplanes
signals from overlapped images. Multiple focus spots188,197 or Bessel beam198 is used to scan

                                               117


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

several planes or entire volume, and 1 PMT is used to record the 2D projection of 3D signals.
A computational algorithm that considers the prior information of each plane (cell position and
calcium indicator kinetics) can efficiently untangle the overlapped images into spatiotemporal
signals of the neuron activities. The essential limitation of this method lies in how well crosstalk
between different paths and SNR can be optimised. Spatiotemporal code multiplexing199 uses
a digital mirror device (DMD) to add temporal patterns on separated beams (to scan different
regions), and a single PMT to collect all signals. A decoding algorithm is applied to extracts
emission signals that inherited the temporal code. Wavelength multiplexing200 uses multiple
beams with different wavelengths to image cells labelled with different fluorophores. Multiple
dichroic mirrors separate the multicolour signals. This can be useful for structural imaging or
to distinguish activities arising from different cell types expressing two different indicators.
       While multiplexing approaches modulate the excitation PSF, the following approaches
modulate mainly the detection PSF.
       Extended depth of field microscope: the method consists in enlarging the depth of
field to image simultaneously objects that are located in different planes. It can be achieved, for
example, with a computer-generated hologram (CGH, as mentioned earlier in Section 1.1.3),
used on the fluorescence path. The 2P laser beam is then divided into multiple beamlets,
precisely illuminating neurons of interest (as many as 100) at different depths. By placing a
cubic phase mask in the detection path, fluorescence signals from different depths (up to
hundreds of µm range) are all focused on the camera and recorded simultaneously201–203. This
method has the disadvantage of completely sacrificing axial resolution.
       Light field microscopy: Computational imaging allows to extract different imaging
depths from a single acquisition. To this aim, a microlens array is positioned before the camera
so that richer information encoding the direction and intensity of the emitted light is recorded.
With all this direction and intensity information, one can reconstruct a 3D image of the sample.
For example, 20 vol/s light-field in vivo functional imaging of Zebrafish larval brain spanning
700µm×700µm×200µm is reached using this method204,205.


       Compared to the sequential scheme, the parallel schemes have acquisition speed
independent of the number of planes (Nplane). In particular, camera-based approaches can reach
high acquisition rates up to kHz. They have promising potentials as they can match the fast
response of voltage imaging indicators, thus providing higher temporal resolution to observe
neuron activities. However, there are also challenges in terms of signal to noise ratio, axial


                                                118


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

sectioning and spatial resolution, especially in dense and scattering samples, since existing
methods spread the signal over many pixels and/or superimpose it to that of the other planes.


       In the next section, we introduce a new wavefront engineering concept, called
“SmartLens”, that can be applied for simultaneous multiplane imaging. We will show that this
technic could provide several advantages over existing technologies, making it a method worth
studying for brain activity investigation.




                                             119


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


4.3. Wavefront engineering SmartLenses using thermo-optical effects

    4.3.1. Overview of the SmartLens concept




Figure 4.2 Principle of the electrically tunable SmartLens device. Electrically controlled
resistive spirals induce a thermal refractive index modulation in the thermal-responsive
material. (a) Schematic of a single device design; (b) Calculated 3D distribution of the
temperature rise caused by electrical heating of the spiral; (c) Calculated refractive index
variation induced by the temperature rise. 182

        The SmartLens (SL) technology exploits electrically-induced thermal phase shifts at the
microscale182. Figure 4.2 describes the overall concept. A theoretical model enables the precise
design of a resistive microwire. Following microfabrication, the device (Figure 4.2(a)) is
electrically powered to deliver, through Joule effect, the pre-determined temperature landscape
∆T(x,y,z) into a thermo-responsive polymer (see Figure 4.2(b)). Due to the temperature
                                                     𝑑𝑛
dependence of its refractive index (∆𝑛(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) ≈ [𝑑𝑇 ] ∆𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) in the linear approximation,

as discussed in Section 3.4.4.1), the polymer experiences a local refractive index modulation
(see Figure 4.2(c)) that precisely shapes the incoming light wavefront with the pre-determined
pattern.
        The SmartLens technology could complement the existing optical shaping toolbox (e.g.,
SLMs206, deformable mirrors207, tunable lens208–217) by offering the following advantages:
-    Polarisation insensitivity and quasi-achromaticity. These are important advantages
     compared to SLMs, especially for applications involving dim fluorescence signal. Indeed,
     since the SLMs involve birefringent index modulation, they can only shape one
     polarisation direction, leading to at least a 50% loss in fluorescence signal206. This feature
     has limited their applicability, especially in imaging. As discussed in ref182, Smartlenses
     can potentially reach transmission >90%. Furthermore, SLMs are highly chromatic as they
     work in a diffractive regime. On the contrary, since SmartLenses work in a refractive

                                               120


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

     regime, they can then be used over a broad wavelength range to (e.g.) manipulate the
     wavefront on both the excitation and fluorescence collection paths, as discussed in Section
     4.4.1.
-    Transmission mode. Unlike most SLMs or deformable mirrors, SmartLenses can operate
     in transmission, allowing compact optical systems that could be integrated into endoscopes
     or miniature microscopes.
-    Freeform wavefront distortion. Deformable tunable lenses have found many applications
     due to their compact design, cost efficiency and transmission operating mode. However,
     since they are usually based on polymer (or liquid) interface deformations, they are limited
     in terms of degrees of freedom, making it hard to achieve freeform optical elements.
     SmartLenses are more versatile in this respect, and the electrical design can be optimised
     to generate complex functions based on either pure or a combination of Zernike
     polynomials, including lenses, aberration correctors and other specific optical functions (as
     an example, see the inverted-axicon in Annex 3). This can be useful to optimise the PSF of
     our fluorescent multiplane microscope or specific beam generation.
-    Cost-effective. SmartLenses are relatively easy to manufacture. Since the method requires
     only one lithographic step, it makes the components relatively inexpensive and easy to
     fabricate. This would facilitate the dissemination of the technique within biology
     laboratories and make easily accessible customised designs.
-    Micrometre size. SmartLenses can be easily arranged in an array because of their
     micrometre size, which brings many potential benefits. For example, as will be discussed
     in the next section, an array of lenses with individually tunable focal lengths can be applied
     to achieve simultaneous focusing in different planes. Interestingly, the small size of the
     lenses potentially enables to integrate them into fibred endoscope systems.

    4.3.2. SmartLenses array for simultaneous multiplane imaging

        In the last years, extensive efforts have been made to develop tunable micro-lenses using
various approaches, including electromechanical, electromagnetic, optical and thermal
actuators or stimuli-responsive hydrogels. Still, only very few works proposed to arrange them
in arrays. While the SmartLens technology belongs to the family of microscale wavefront
engineering techniques, it can be designed into various optical functions, including lenses
whose focal lengths change with voltages. Thus, it can also be classified into the tunable micro-
lens family and can be arranged in arrays using classical lithographic methods.


                                               121


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




             Figure 4.3 (a) Array of 5x5 Smartlenses. (b) Principle of
             simultaneous multiplane imaging using a SmartLens Array.

       The main idea of this chapter is to use an array of SmartLenses (see Figure 4.3(a)) to
perform simultaneous multiplane imaging of brain activities (see Figure 4.3(b)). Indeed,
while a single SmartLens already offers a powerful way to control a defocus (or other
aberration), additional control possibilities are offered when several SmartLenses are arranged
in an array. As a simple example, we recently demonstrated, with R. Quidant’s Group,
broadband simultaneous multiplane imaging at the macroscale by simply inserting a SmartLens
array in front of a standard camera182: by tunning each SmartLens independently, the method
allows the simultaneous refocusing of several macro-objects located at various distances from
the imaging system. Different planes of interest are monitored at the same time, without
scanning. Here, we want to adapt this idea in fluorescence microscopy to simultaneously
monitor several neurons located in different planes (see Figure 4.3(b)).

   4.3.3. SmartLens model and validation

       Before demonstrating the imaging system, a series of characterisations are necessary to
understand the performances of the SmartLenses. Here we explain the principle of the device,
the fabrication process and the characterisation through wavefront imaging.
       Electro-thermo-optical model: Similar to the laser pattern determination for
temperature shaping in Section 3.3.3, the electrical design also requires theoretical modelling.
Briefly, the model, proposed by Pascal Berto in ref182, considers a spiral electrical geometry
(Figure 4.3(a)) modelled by an assembly of N circular wire-loops of radius ri. The electrical
resistance of an infinitesimal wire segment of length 𝑑𝑙 reads:

                                                𝜌(𝑇). 𝑑𝑙
                                 𝑑𝑅(𝑟𝑖 , 𝑇) =                                    Equation 4.1
                                                𝑤(𝑟𝑖 ). ℎ𝑔

                                                122


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

where ℎ𝑔 stands for the wire thickness, 𝑤(𝑟𝑖 ) the wire width and 𝜌(𝑇) the electrical resistivity.
The electric current flow I through the wire segment locally induces, by Joule effect, a
dissipated heat power 𝑑𝑃(𝑟𝑖 , 𝑇) = 𝑑𝑅(𝑟𝑖 , 𝑇). 𝐼 2. An incoming plane wave passing through the
polymer accumulates an optical path difference (OPD) that can be calculated, as described in
Section 3.4.4.1, by a simple convolution between the dissipated power 𝑃 and the phase Green’s
function 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 :


                                    𝑂𝑃𝐷 = 𝑃 ∗ 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷                                 Equation 4.2


It is worth mentioning that, in practice, the model is a bit more sophisticated and takes into
account the temperature-dependence of the resistivity.
       To validate this model, a SmartLens element is designed and fabricated based on a
microfabricated gold wire with a simple electrical geometry: a 200-µm diameter spiral heater
with 9 regularly spaced loops of constant width w (see Figure 4.4(b)). PDMS was chosen as a
thermo-responsive polymer due to its high transparency in the visible region, its thermal
stability at high temperature218, and because it exhibits relatively large refractive index
variations with temperature219 ([𝑑𝑛⁄𝑑𝑇] = −4.5 ∙ 10−4 𝐾 −1 ).
       Using this model, the design is optimized using a genetic algorithm: small variations are
added to each generation of design. The electro-thermo-optical model is then used to determine
how well this design fits the targeted wavefront. Sub-optimal designs are discarded, and the
best ones are kept and reinjected in the optimization, in a process akin to Darwin’s natural
selection rules.
       SmartLens fabrication: This has been performed in R. Quidant’s team at ICFO
(Barcelona) by Johann Osmond and Laurent Philippet. The samples were produced in one lift-
off step, consisting of UV photolithography with a negative resist (Microchemicals AZ nLOF
2020) on a soda-lime wafer. Subsequently, Ti (2 nm) / Au (50 nm) were deposited using e-
beam and thermal evaporation, respectively. Lift-off was completed by removing the resist with
acetone. Finally, the whole samples were covered with h=1 mm thick of PDMS (Sylgard 184).
       SmartLens characterisation: We experimentally measured the thermal OPD using a
wavefront sensor (SID4, Phasics S.A.) under a custom-built microscope (×10, NA=0.45) in the
same way that we measured optically-induced thermal OPD in Section 3.4.4.2. The SmartLens
was illuminated through a Köhler illuminator. To extract the thermal contribution to the OPD,
we subtracted the reference wavefront measured while the device was off (V = 0) from the
wavefront measured when heating the device (V ≠ 0). Figure 4.4(b) shows a good agreement
                                               123


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

between experimental and simulated OPD maps for different applied voltages, thus validating
the electro-thermo-optical wavefront modelling. Furthermore, from the thermal OPD
measurement, we extracted the experimental temperature map in the plane of the resistor by
deconvolution with the OPD Green’s function 𝐺𝑂𝑃𝐷 , as described in Section 3.4.4.3. This
measurement also ensures that the ceiling temperature (T = 250 °C for PDMS218) is not reached,
to avoid damage.




Figure 4.4 Validation of model (adapted from ref182) . (a) Setup for characterization. A plane
wave (Köhler illumination) illuminates the SmartLens that is imaged on a high-resolution
wavefront sensor. (b) Simulation (top row) and measurement (bottom row) of the temperature
and OPD maps for V=6V and 12 V.

       The OPD map in Figure 4.4(b) clearly show that the SmartLenses induce a negative
                                                                    𝑑𝑛
phase curvature, as expected since the thermo-optical coefficient 𝑑𝑇 of PDMS is negative. Thus,

the simple design we chose (9 regularly spaced loops of constant width) acts as a tunable
diverging lens.

   4.3.4. Dynamic focal range

       The experimental OPD profile measured in Figure 4.4 (b) can be approximated 136,188,220
                               𝑥2
by a parabola  = 𝑓𝑆𝐿 (1 − 2𝑓2 ) in order to estimate the focal length fSL of the Smartlens (see
                                𝑆𝐿

Figure 4.5(a) for V=3V). We performed the same measurement on Smartlenses of different
diameters 𝐷 = 10, 50, 200, and 540 µm, all acting as tunable diverging lenses. Figure 4.5 (b)
shows, for four spiral sizes, the measured focal length (in log scale) depending on the applied
voltage V (in Volts). When the SmartLens is off (V = 0 V), the device acts as a plane-parallel
plate (infinite focal length). Interestingly, the focal length |f| decreases faster with the applied


                                                124


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

voltage V for smaller heaters, since the radius of curvature of the generated lens is shorter than
for bigger heaters. For instance, the vergence of the 200 µm diameter spiral reaches fSL=-2.2mm
for V = 12 V, which corresponds to an f-number |fSL /D|=11. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that
the accuracy and precision of the phase, and thus of the focal length, are only limited by the
applied voltage accuracy and precision.




Figure 4.5 Tunability range of SmartLenses for four different sizes. (a) Experimental OPD
profile (dots) for a resistor diameter D = 540 µm, V = 3 V. The SmartLens element acts as a
diverging lens, and the measured OPD profile is fitted by a parabola (red line) in order to
estimate the focal length f. (b) Evolution of focal lengths estimated using the same method for
various diameters D, plotted against the applied voltage

       When integrated into a microscale array (Figure 4.3(a)), those lenses can be tuned
independently and allow focusing on different planes simultaneously. In the following section,
we use a diverging SmartLens array to demonstrate focus tuning and multiplane imaging.




                                               125


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


4.4. Development of a multiplane imaging fluorescence microscope

       As demonstrated at the macro-scale182, Smartlenses arrays allow the simultaneous
refocusing of objects located in different planes, a technique that can be applied to 3D
microscopy. This feature is of particular interest in functional voltage imaging, which allows
the fluorescence monitoring of the activity of several neurons221,222. However, this method is
particularly challenging since dim fluorescence signals located in non-deterministic 3D (x, y,
z) positions need to be imaged at high frame rates (typ. 1 kHz) with a good SNR to detect short
action potentials (typ. 1ms). In this context, a drawback of sequential z-scanning of the imaging
plane is the reduction of SNR and temporal resolution222, and some important events can
possibly be missed. Here, we propose to use a SmartLens array for parallel (simultaneous)
monitoring of fast transient neuron activity at different depths. This simple strategy will be
implemented in 1-photon fluorescence microscopy.

   4.4.1. Overview of the setup

       I developed the setup with a master student intern, Reda Berrada. The optical path is
described in Figure 4.6: a defocusing SmartLens array is inserted in a homemade widefield
fluorescence microscope to control both the illumination and imaging paths. A blue LED (λ =
488 nm) excites the fluorescent targets, which are neurons expressing the GcaMP proteins
(calcium indicators) in Zebrafish Larvae. Those neurons emit an increase of fluorescence during
electrical activities. To excite only the neurons of interest (and therefore reduce the fluorescent
background and improve the signal to noise ratio), a Digital Mirror Device (DMD) is placed
in a conjugated object plane to shape the illumination in the transverse (XY) plane. The
illumination light is reflected by a dichroic mirror and projected in an intermediate plane after
the SmartLenses array; it is then projected in the sample by a microscope. The SmartLenses
(SL) array, located close to an intermediate image plane (I.P) at a distance Δ, will be tuned
electrically to illuminate neurons located at different depths z. Collected fluorescence light
crossing the tuned SL on its way back will remain conjugated with the camera. It should be
noted that the achromaticity and insensitivity to the polarisation of SLs are crucial here. Parallel
methods37,70,136 (computed holography) based on polarisation-sensitive and chromatic LC-SLM
would not allow this implementation. It is also important to mention that this setup is relatively
simple, compact and cost-effective.




                                                126


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 4.6 Schematic of the simultaneous multiplane imaging microscopy based on a
SmartLens array (located close to an intermediate image plane). F1=f4=200mm, f2 = 50mm, f3
= 125mm, the objective is ×20, water immersed. The dichroic mirror reflects 480 nm excitation
light. OP: object plane, IP: intermediate image plane

   4.4.2. Modelling and measurement of the axial range

       In this section, we study the focal tuning performances of an individual SmartLens (SL),
an essential characteristic of the multiplane imaging system. The estimated focal length for SL
with a diameter of 540 µm is typically around -40 mm when applying a 10V voltage (Figure
4.5(b)). We placed it in front of an intermediate imaging plane (marked A in Figure 4.7) and
measure the defocusing ability ΔZ’ (BB’) in function with voltage V and distance Δ (OSLA).




                       Figure 4.7 Schematic of the SL defocusing setup

       Figure 4.7 shows the setup using diverging SLs as defocusing device. F1-f2 is a telescope
system that brings the image of a point source (i.e. a single pixel of the DMD) to an intermediate
plane at position A, allowing space for implementing the SL system. The SL is at plane OSL
before the intermediate plane A, Δ is the distance between plane OSL and plane A. When no
voltage is applied to the SL, the point source image is in A. The microscope then images the

                                               127


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

point source in B. Once a voltage is applied on the SL, it becomes a diverging lens (i.e. with a
focal length f’SL<0), defocusing the intermediate image from plane A to plane A’ and the image
from plane B to plane B’. We denote these defocusing values as AA’ = ΔZ and BB’ = ΔZ’.
Using the Gaussian lens formula, ΔZ writes:

                                               𝛥2
                                      𝛥𝑍 = − ′                                          Equation 4.3
                                            𝑓𝑆𝐿 + 𝛥

       For the sake of simplicity, we use the approximation of small 𝛥𝑍 and 𝛥𝑍 ′ values. Thus
the relation between 𝛥𝑍 and 𝛥𝑍 ′ can be represented by the longitudinal magnification M² of
                                                           𝑓𝑇𝐿
the f3-fobjective system: 𝛥𝑍 ′ = 𝑀2 𝛥𝑍 (where 𝑀 = 𝑀                     , 𝑀𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 the magnification
                                                         𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑓3

indicated on the objective, and 𝑓𝑇𝐿 the focal length of the standard tube lens of the microscope,
180 mm). Therefore we have:

                                                                  2
                                 ′
                                       𝛥2       𝑓𝑇𝐿
                              𝛥𝑍 = − ′     (              )                             Equation 4.4
                                    𝑓𝑆𝐿 + 𝛥 𝑀𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑓3

                     ′
       The value of fSL being negative, it evolves with applied voltage as shown in Figure 4.5:
                                                 ′
the higher the voltage, the smaller the value |𝑓𝑆𝐿 |, thus the higher the value of ΔZ ′ . From
                                                                                                              2
                                           ′                                                  fTL
Equation 4.4, we can also deduce that ΔZ increases with the value of Δ. The term (M                       )
                                                                                           objective f3

shows that smaller magnification of the objective and focal length of 𝑓3 yield a larger defocus
                                                                             ′
ΔZ ′ . However, Δ cannot increase without limit; it has to be smaller than |fSL | to ensure that the
image B’ is a real image; it also needs to be small enough so that the effective diameter of the
SL will not limit the pupil of the system, which means that no light passes outside of the SL
effective zone (considering a point source on the DMD). Figure 4.8 shows the theoretical and
                                           1
experimental relations between 𝑉𝑆𝐿 = f′ and ΔZ ′ in chosen experimental conditions, and
                                           SL

Figure 4.10 shows the PSF of the defocused point source. The experimental defocusing value
is higher than the theoretical calculation, as shown in Figure 4.8. However, we consider in the
model that the SmartLens is a thin lens located in the plane of the electrical resistor spirals, with
a focal length estimated from Figure 4.5(b). In reality, the PDMS layer (Figure 4.2(a)) has a
thickness of 1mm, which can induce an error in the estimation of the position of the actual
thermal lens. The effect of the thin PDMS layer is not taken into consideration in the model.
Also, as the sample that we used here was not yet optimised for aberrations, its focal length

                                                128


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

values may have been influenced by the spherical aberration. Moreover, the estimation of focal
lengths is not done for the exact SmartLens that we use here. The exact focal length might differ
from that measured in Figure 4.5(b) for the same voltage applied. Those could be the reasons
explaining the lower defocusing values that were measured, as compared to theoretical
expectations.




Figure 4.8 Theoretical and experimental relations between 𝑉𝑆𝐿 and 𝛥𝑍 ′ (with 𝛥=8mm, the
diameter of SL DSL=540µm, f3=125µm, 𝑀𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 =20, fTL=180mm). 𝑓𝑆𝐿 is estimated from
Figure 4.5(b) for each voltage.

   4.4.3. PSF characterization

        In order to estimate the axial and lateral extension of the excitation PSF, a single pixel
of the DMD (pitch 13.6µm) in the sample plane was imaged with the system described in Figure
4.9. The total magnification of this system is given by 𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡 = (𝑓𝑜𝑏𝑗 𝑓3 )⁄(𝑓2 𝑓1 ). It should be
noted   that    under   these   conditions,   the    geometrical   image   size   of   the   pixel
(𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡 . 𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙 =0.247µm, with 𝑠𝑝𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑙 the pixel size) is negligible compared to the size of the PSF
when the latter is limited by diffraction (typ. λ/2NA=0.6µm, considering NA=0.4). The pixel
can therefore be considered as a point source. The 3D excitation PSF is then measured using a
forward collection path consisting of a microscope objective with a large NA, a tube lens and a
camera. For different voltages applied to the SmartLens, the objective is scanned axially to
measure the 3D PSF (see Figure 4.9).



                                               129


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 4.9 Schematic of the PSF characterisation setup. LED source λ = 488 nm, f1=200mm,
f2 = 50mm, f3 = 125mm, f4=250mm. The objectives are both ×20, NA=0.40.

       Figure 4.10(c) shows that with this configuration (𝛥=8mm, DSL=540µm, f3=125µm,
𝑀𝑜𝑏𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 =20, the corresponding tube lens for objective fTL=180mm), we can distinguish
different planes with around 10µm z-resolution, which evolves with defocusing depth 𝛥Z’.
With 18V applied to the resistor, we can reach 79µm displacement in the z-direction.




                                            130


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021




Figure 4.10 Defocused point source, w𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝛥 = 8𝑚𝑚, V = 0V, 3.6V, 9V and 18V. (a) XZ
projection of the PSF defocused by SL with different voltages. (b) xy-projection of PSF on focus.
(c) PSF profile along the optical axis (z-direction). (d) PSF profile along the x-direction. The
excitation source is generated by 1 pixel on the DMD.




                                              131


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


4.5.   Preliminary results on a Zebrafish




            Figure 4.11 6dpf Zebrafish larvae head-embedded in agar gel and free-
            tailed, maintained in a solution that supports its life

       The zebrafish larvae (Danio rerio) are almost transparent, which makes them ideal for
in vivo fluorescence imaging. Here we investigate 6 days post-fertilization (6dpf) larvae,
genetically encoding calcium (Ca2+) indicator GcaMP6s to measure neuronal activity. When a
neuron is active and fires an action potential, there is a Ca2+ influx into the cell that is sensed
by the calcium indicator. This results in an increase in its green fluorescence under blue light
illumination (λ = 488 nm). Here, the head of the fish is fixed in 2% agar gel so that it stays still
during the imaging process. The tail of the fish remains free in the liquid so that it can move
freely and evoke activities in the nerve system. In order to increase neuronal activity and thus
fluorescence signals, we add in the water the drug Gabazine, which blocks inhibitory receptors
of the cells and thus enhances activity. The zebrafish larvae sample has been prepared by Giulia
Faini (post-doc in the group of F. Del Bene at Institut de la vision).
       We placed the SmartLens array at Δ=8 mm in front of the intermediate plane, as shown
in Figure 4.6. Thus its structure is not visible in the sample image plane. In Figure 4.12(a), we
can only see some shadows within the dashed circles due to the optical absorption of gold wires
in excitation and collection. When a 0V voltage is applied to the SLs, no lens effect is activated;
thus, we only see neurons at the focal plane z = 0. By tuning the voltages individually in chosen
Smart Lenses, we can bring neurons located at different depths and different region of the field
of view to the same image plane. For example, in Figure 4.12, 11V applied on SL#1 brings
neurons at plan z=26µm into focus (positive z means deeper in tissue); 16V applied on SL#2,

                                                132


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

neurons at z=42µm are on focus. Figure 4.12 (c) shows that neurons from the three different
planes are all observed on the same image when the appropriate voltages are applied
individually on different elements.




Figure 4.12 Widefield calcium imaging of neuron activities at different depths in the zebrafish
larvae. SmartLens elements are tuned with different voltages to focus in different planes. (a)
0V applied on all elements; (b) 11V applied on element #1; (c) 11V applied on element #1
and 16V applied on element #2.



                                             133


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       In the images shown in Figure 4.12, a widefield illumination technique was used. This
induces background fluorescence signals from the tissue, decreasing the signal to noise ratio
(SNR). In order to increase the SNR, we can use a selective illumination of zones of interest
using a digital mirror device (DMD). The selective illumination requires taking at first a long
image stack, which records all active neurons’ positions; thus, one can address interesting zones
afterwards. In Figure 4.13(a), widefield imaging outside of the green dashed circle is focused
on plane z=0, while the zone in the green dashed circle is focused on plane z=36µm using the
activated SL located here. A long stack acquisition of all the neuron activities is taken with this
SL element activated (500 images were taken in ~2.5 minutes with a frame rate of 3.278 Hz).
The stack is processed by counting the maximum of each pixel (Z-projection through ImageJ);
thus, all the neurons which have fired during the acquisition were recorded, both in the plane z
=0 (outside the green dashed line circle) and in the plane z=36µm (inside the green dashed line
circle). Then, we chose several locations of interest, shown by white dashed squares in Figure
4.13(a). Using the DMD device, calibrated illumination patterns (Figure 4.13(b)) were sent to
the sample to illuminate only the chosen neurons rather than the entire imaged field. Figure
4.13(c) shows the resulting patterned illumination: only neurons located in the illuminated
zones of interest were possible to give fluorescence light when firing.




Figure 4.13 Fluorescence images (calcium imaging) under wide-field illumination and
selective illumination. (a) 'Z-projection' calculation results of 500 images taken during 2.5
minutes while the whole field is illuminated to capture fluorescence from all active neurons;
(b) illumination pattern on the DMD for preselected regions; (c) A fluorescence image taken
with an integration time of 0.3s under the selective illumination condition reveals the activity
of the illuminated neurons.

       Under selective illumination, we observed neuron activities in different planes. In Figure
4.14(a), no SL is activated; thus, the whole image is taken in the plane z = 0. Very few neuron
activities appear in z = 0, and there is almost no event detected within 2 minutes in zone 1 and
2.

                                               134


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

        In Figure 4.14(b), one SL is activated inside the white dashed circle and becomes a
diverging lens: zones 3 and 4 stays in the plane z = 0 and zones 1 and 2 are brought to a deeper
plane, z=36 µm. We observe neuron activities in zone 1 and 2 at z = 36 µm. In zones 3 and 4,
there is no obvious change as we keep looking at the same neurons in the plane z =0, where the
activity is low.
       This experiment illustrates the possibilities offered by SmartLenses when imaging
multiple planes, as it offers the possibility of recording neural spiking in multiple planes, some
of which were previously inaccessible.




Figure 4.14 Recording spontaneous neuron activities through fluorescent imaging. (a) When
the SL is off, the whole image is taken at z = 0. Only very few spontaneous neurons activities
are observed at this depth, within zones 3 and 4; no neuron activities are observed inside zone
1 and 2. (b) As the SL is activated inside an effective zone drawn in white dashes, the focusing
is locally brought to a deeper plane z = 36µm; very frequent spontaneous neurons activities
are observed at zone 1 and 2 at this depth; Zones 3 and 4 stay focused at z = 0: a firing rate
similar to that of the initial situation (a) is observed. The time scale bar corresponds to 20 s;
the intensity is in arbitrary units.




                                               135


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


4.6. Discussion

       The results in Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.14 have demonstrated the feasibility of
multiplane imaging using the SmartLens device. This proof-of-principle experiment also
suggests several points for further improvements.

•   Setup improvement: The setup shown in Figure 4.6 is not perfectly confocal. The rejection
    of the fluorescence background would be much better if the fluorescence signal would be
    imaged back to the DMD. In this condition, the pixels "on" for selective excitation would
    also serve as a pinhole to reject the fluorescence emitted out of the regions of interest.
•   SmartLens transparency: So far, our work has focused on (50-nm thick) absorbing gold
    electrodes leading to a transmission of the order of 65 %, which is detrimental to both the
    optical excitation and collection. This effect is visible in e.g. Figure 4.13(a), where a
    defocused shadow of the SmartLens array is clearly visible. This needs to be improved to
    maximise the signal-to-noise ratio as well as to decrease the integration time (thus
    increasing the frame rate) of the camera, a critical point in Calcium and Voltage imaging.
    Preliminary tests on conductive oxides (Indium Tin Oxide – ITO) have demonstrated
    transmission and absorption at the desired level as well as reduced diffractive effects (only
    1.5% of the incident light is diffracted for 25-nm thick ITO electrodes) compared to 50-nm
    thick gold electrodes. However, this comes at the price of higher SL activation voltage
    values due to the resistivity of ITO. It is worth mentioning that the use of low absorption
    ITO would also make it possible to work in a 2-photon excitation regime in order to increase
    axial sectioning.
•   Thermal crosstalk: In steady-state, temperature profiles decay with the distance according
    to the steady-state thermal Green’s function. This induces thermal cross-talk between
    neighbouring SmartLenses. When we activate one SL, we also induce aberrations in the
    adjacent SLs. For example, in Figure 4.12(c), neuron images in zone #3 are influenced by
    the activation of the SL located in zone #2. An interesting strategy investigated in
    R.Quidant’s group consists in confining the temperature increase by engineering the
    thermal diffusivity around the resistor. Adding high thermal conductivity heat sinks around
    each SL would help mitigate this cross-talk.
•   Improving the PSF: PSF quality is an important factor for spatial resolution. In SmartLens
    applications, it can be improved by correcting aberrations through numerically engineering
    the OPD profile. To reach the desired OPD, one has to solve the inverse problem and find

                                               136


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

   out the electrical design that gives the proper heat source distribution. In article 182, a genetic
   algorithm is applied to determine the optimal resistor design leading to the targeted
   wavefront shape. The variables for one design are the number of wire circles, the radius and
   the width of each wire circle. The genetic algorithms give stochastic mutation and crossover
   on each parameter and select the optimal using a merit function. After typically 60 iterations
   which take around 30 minutes, one effective design can be obtained. The efficiency of this
   method is discussed in article182, and various wavefront shapes are acquired experimentally.
   In Figure 4.15, several different wavefronts are demonstrated: pure defocus, piston, hollow-
   axicon and vertical astigmatism. It shows a high degree of freedom for wavefront control
   and broad potential applications. Annex 3 shows an example using the inverted axicon to
   generate tunable annular and Bessel beam. For our imaging system, where the SmartLens
   is located in an intermediate image plane, the PSF can also be optimised in advance using
   this approach to pre-compensate possible aberrations of the system and obtain an optimal
   PSF.




Figure 4.15 Wavefront engineering with SmartLenses - Experimental results obtained on a set
of four spiral geometries optimised for four different wavefronts: (a) Pure Defocus (diverging
lens). (b) Flat profile (piston). (c) Conical surface (hollow-axicon). (d) Vertical astigmatism.
In each case, an optical reflection image of the fabricated spiral design and the corresponding
experimental temperature and wavefront is shown.




                                                137


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


4.7. Conclusion

       We have demonstrated in preliminary experiments that a diverging SmartLens can be
easily applied to simultaneous in vivo multiplane fluorescence imaging, with a local defocusing
range of around 100µm and depth of field of around 10µm. In the present experiments, the
heating spirals are made of gold, thus blocking a non-negligible amount of excitation and
fluorescence light. To acquire enough photons, we are currently limited to 100-300ms frame
integration times. This frame rate can be improved (i) by using a more powerful excitation
source and, more importantly, (ii) by using ITO as electrical heating material, since it is almost
transparent to visible light and causes little diffraction. Thus, one will not see the 'shadows' as
in Figure 4.13(a) and could expect brighter and clearer images as well as higher frame rates. In
Figure 4.13 and Figure 4.14, we only activated one of the SmartLenses in the array to observe
activities in two planes simultaneously as an example. By optimising the optical system
(increasing the defocusing range) and SL positions, massively multiplane imaging is possible.
A new set of experiments showing applications of this concept to a biologically relevant
problem will be carried out in the near future. Furthermore, this miniature device can be
associated with GRIN (Gradient Index) lenses to achieve endoscopic multiplane imaging; it is
light enough to be implemented in rodent-wearable microscopes. Last but not least, once the
frame time is shortened through the optimisation of transmission, the advantages of
simultaneous multiplane imaging can be fully appreciated when it allows the imaging of
previously inaccessible millisecond voltage imaging signals in multiple 3D-distributed neurons.
As shown in Figure 4.1(b), this will contribute to drawing even more interest towards fast in
vivo observation of neuron activities in brain circuits.


The results presented in this chapter have been partially published in:

Tunable and free-form planar optics

Nature Photonics 2019 13(9), 649–656

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-019-0486-3




                                               138


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


                                       Conclusion

       This work started off centred on the evaluation of the temperature rise induced by two-
photon optogenetic stimulation in tissue. This was achieved through luminescence thermometry
and a thermal model (Chapter 2). These developments led us to extend the scope towards two
other themes, both also connected to optics, thermal phenomena, and the study of neural
behaviour: reconfigurable temperature control using thermo-plasmonics (Chapter 3) and
simultaneous multi-plane imaging using tunable thermo-optical SmartLenses (Chapter 4). The
temperature control technology provides a platform for studying thermal perturbation on cell
physiology and metabolism; the multi-plane imaging opens new perspectives for observing
brain activities in 3D.
       Our luminescence thermometry 'endoscope' was realised by fixing the temperature-
sensitive probe (an Er/Yb glass particle) at the extremity of a double-clad fibre, which guides
the pumping light to the probe and collects the luminescence light for spectral analysis. This
system achieved stable and precise temperature measurements deep (~330µm) inside the brain,
with a 2-millisecond temporal resolution, up to ~15µm spatial resolution and 0.05K temperature
sensitivity (after 500 averages). There are trade-offs between those parameters.: for example,
by increasing the integration time of the spectrometer, one can decrease the noise thus increase
the temperature sensitivity, at the expense of a longer temporal resolution; by decreasing the
Er/Yb probe size, one can have a finer spatial resolution, however fewer photons are then
available which increases the noise. Our system is explicitly developed to measure the
millisecond, microscale and sub-Kelvin temperature rise induced by 2P optogenetics
stimulation. It can also be applied in many other contexts, for example, to measure the
temperature rise caused by 2P/3P imaging, and even broader applications, whenever remote,
minimally invasive temperature sensing is required. Depending on the spatial, temporal and
temperature sensitivity requirements under different contexts, we can modify the acquisition
parameters as well as the structure of the fibre probe. For example, the double-clad fibre
structure can be replaced by a thinner fibre structure, e.g. thinner single-mode fibres or fibres
with a tapered end, particularly if lower sensitivities are acceptable (since thinner fibres will
collect luminescence less efficiently). With a thinner probe, one can measure closer to the target
and cause less damage. One can also modify the optical structure at the fibre end to optimise
luminescence collection. For example, instead of positioning the probe directly at the centre of
the cleaved fibre, one could create a spherical lens (with optical glue, lithography, moulding or


                                               139


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

by melting the fibre tip) and then position the Er/Yb probe at the focal point of the lens. Instead
of using optical glue, one can also melt the probing material directly on the fibre, which could
hopefully increase the illuminating efficiency and decrease loss by surface reflection. One can
even add reflective coating around the probe to send more luminescence light to the fibre. On
the other hand, now that we have achieved “single-pixel” measurement using one probe situated
on the core of a double-clad fibre, it would thus be interesting to increase the pixel number
using an optical fibre bundle and realise a thermal endoscope. For this purpose, finer
manufacturing would be required to avoid cross-talk. Besides, the luminescence thermometry
can be applied on various working mode without the use of an optical fibre as long as stable
calibration is provided.
           Our in vivo temperature measurements have validated a thermal model that simulates
photo-induced temperature rises in scattering tissues. The temperature probe cannot measure
inside the heat source itself (a 2P optogenetic holographic stimulation spot) because this will
influence the light absorption of the tissue and disturb the luminescence of the probe. For this
reason, measurements were carried out at various lateral positions (66-200µm) away from the
holographic spot, and we varied the pulse duration and power of the holographic spot. The
experiments agree well with the thermal model for the chosen scattering coefficients, taken
from publications. Using the model, we estimated the maximum temperature rises inside the
holographic spot for typical 2P optogenetic stimulation conditions (12µm-diameter, 1030nm-
wavelength, 0.8-NA, 330µm deep in the brain, power P at the exit of objective and duration
tpulse):
                                         Maximum temperature rise in spot centre [K]
            tpulse [ms]
                                           P = 10 mW                        P = 50 mW
                  10                          0.14                             0.71
                  30                          0.20                             0.99

Due to the linearity of thermal phenomena with respect to the excitation power and based on
these results, we can simulate with a good degree of confidence the temperature rise induced
by a train of optogenetic stimulation pulses and multiple spots distributed in space. This model
also allows for calculating the photo-induced thermal effect of 2P/3P scanning imaging.
Combining the thermal probe and thermal model, we provide a toolbox to evaluate the photo-
induced thermal effect in tissue, which we believe will answer most thermal concerns within
the optogenetics community.



                                               140


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

       The reconfigurable temperature control combines wavefront engineering and thermo-
plasmonics. It allows to create chosen temperature patterns in a specific domain of space at the
microscale (down to sub-cell resolution) to e.g. study the influence of localized heating on cells.
We experimentally demonstrated the feasibility of the procedure by imaging the temperature
with micrometre resolution using a method based on wavefront-sensing. There are clearly
                                                                      1
limitations to the method: temperature gradients steeper than the 𝑟 imposed by heat diffusion

are not achievable without using (currently unavailable) negative heat sources, i.e. local cooling.
For similar reasons, the temperature can only be controlled in limited domains of space, and
                    1
will be driven by       diffusion, collective effects (i.e. other neighbouring heat sources), and
                    𝑟

boundary conditions outside of this domain. Nevertheless, overcoming thermal diffusion by
pre-engineering thermal sources promises a wide range of applications, for which
reconfigurable, fast and accurate temperature shaping is necessary. We showed as proof of
principle that this technique has the potential to create heat stimulation targeting different parts
of a neuron. In adherent neuron cells, we could select various zones of interest (spatially and
temporally) in one neuron or for a group of neurons and create homogeneous temperature rises
within a limited (~10µm) region above the substrate. As the setup is quite compact and only
involves a quasi transparent coverslip on the sample side, it is possible to observe at the same
time the neuronal activities through patch-clamp, calcium imaging or voltage imaging, allowing
the observation of electrophysiological responses under controlled levels of thermal stimulation.
This technique also raises interests in thermogenetics, where heat is used to evoke action
potentials. We can imagine a cultured neuron circuit adherent to the substrate, thermally
activable by spatiotemporal temperature patterns. The method is reconfigurable so that the
stimulation pattern can be adjusted very fast during the experiment, making it possible to
observe and adjust neuron stimulations on a coverslip in real-time.
       Besides application in biology, this approach can also be used in physics (e.g. phase
changes, microscale thermal phenomena), microfluidics and chemistry, where thermal
gradients are crucial to drive, e.g., reaction kinetics.
       Temperature control at the microscale can also be exploited to make tunable optical
devices, which is very useful for 3D imaging. In the last chapter, we have demonstrated that a
diverging SmartLens, realised through micro-electrical-resistor heating in a thermo-optical
medium, can be easily applied to simultaneous in vivo multi-plane imaging. A preliminary
demonstration was obtained by implementing a SmartLenses array into a full-field calcium
imaging system and has shown great potential. By changing the voltage applied on resistors,

                                                 141


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

one can obtain a local defocusing range of around 100µm with a depth of field of around 10µm.
This preliminary work still leaves several aspects open to optimization. Here, the tested device
is made of gold heating spirals, which block a non-negligible amount of excitation and
fluorescence light. To acquire enough photons, we are currently limited to 100-300ms frame
integration times. This can be improved using ITO as electrical heating material, since it is
almost transparent to visible light and causes little diffraction. This solution is being explored,
and we can thus expect brighter and clearer images with higher frame rates. Also, by optimising
the optical system and SLs position, massively multi-plane imaging should be possible. A new
set of experiments showing the applications of this concept to a biologically relevant problem
will be carried out in the near future. Furthermore, this miniature device can be associated with
GRIN (Gradient Index) lenses to achieve endoscopic multi-plane imaging, or can be
implemented in rodent-wearable microscopes. Last but not least, once the frame time is
shortened through the optimisation of transmission, the advantages of simultaneous multi-plane
imaging can be fully appreciated, allowing the imaging of previously inaccessible millisecond
voltage signals in multiple 3D-distributed neurons. We are confident that this will draw even
more interest towards fast in vivo observation of neuron activities in brain circuits.




                                               142


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021


                                      Bibliography

1.    Miller, D. R., Jarrett, J. W., Hassan, A. M. & Dunn, A. K. Deep tissue imaging with
      multiphoton fluorescence microscopy. Curr. Opin. Biomed. Eng. 4, 32–39 (2017).

2.    Luo, L., Callaway, E. M. & Svoboda, K. Genetic Dissection of Neural Circuits. Neuron
      57, 634–660 (2008).

3.    Carter, M. E. & de Lecea, L. Optogenetic investigation of neural circuits in vivo.
      Trends Mol. Med. 17, 197–206 (2011).

4.    Connors, B. W. & Gutnick, M. J. Intrinsic firing patterns of diverse neocortical
      neurons. Trends Neurosci. 13, 99–104 (1990).

5.    Apfelstedt-Sylla, E. & Zrenner, E. Electrophysiology. Clin. Neuro-Ophthalmology A
      Pract. Guid. 87–99 (2007) doi:10.1007/978-3-540-32708-0_7.

6.    Hodgkin, A. L. & Huxley, A. F. A quantitative description of ion currents and its
      applications to conduction and excitation in nerve membranes. J. Physiol. 117, 500–
      544 (1952).

7.    Lodish, H., Berk, A., Zipursky, S. L., Matsudaira, P., Baltimore, D. & Darnell, J. The
      action potential and conduction of electric impulses. in Molecular Cell Biology. 4th
      edition (WH Freeman, 2000).

8.    Jin, L., Han, Z., Platisa, J., Wooltorton, J. R. A., Cohen, L. B. & Pieribone, V. A.
      Single Action Potentials and Subthreshold Electrical Events Imaged in Neurons with a
      Fluorescent Protein Voltage Probe. Neuron 75, 779–785 (2012).

9.    Platkiewicz, J. & Brette, R. A Threshold Equation for Action Potential Initiation. PLOS
      Comput. Biol. 6, 1–16 (2010).

10.   Warden, M. R., Cardin, J. A. & Deisseroth, K. Optical neural interfaces. Annu. Rev.
      Biomed. Eng. 16, 103–129 (2014).

11.   OESTERHELT, D. & STOECKENIUS, W. Rhodopsin-like Protein from the Purple
      Membrane of Halobacterium halobium. Nat. New Biol. 233, 149–152 (1971).

12.   Nagel, G., Szellas, T., Huhn, W., Kateriya, S., Adeishvili, N., Berthold, P., Ollig, D.,
      Hegemann, P. & Bamberg, E. Channelrhodopsin-2, a directly light-gated cation-
      selective membrane channel. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 100, 13940–13945 (2003).


                                              143


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

13.   Nagel, G., Ollig, D., Fuhrmann, M., Kateriya, S., Musti, A. M., Bamberg, E. &
      Hegemann, P. Channelrhodopsin-1: a light-gated proton channel in green algae.
      Science 296, 2395–2398 (2002).

14.   Matsuno-Yagi, A. & Mukohata, Y. Two possible roles of bacteriorhodopsin; a
      comparative study of strains of Halobacterium halobium differing in pigmentation.
      Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 78, 237–243 (1977).

15.   Boyden, E. S., Zhang, F., Bamberg, E., Nagel, G. & Deisseroth, K. Millisecond-
      timescale, genetically targeted optical control of neural activity. Nat. Neurosci. 8,
      1263–1268 (2005).

16.   Zhang, F., Aravanis, A. M., Adamantidis, A., de Lecea, L. & Deisseroth, K. Circuit-
      breakers: optical technologies for probing neural signals and systems. Nat. Rev.
      Neurosci. 8, 577–581 (2007).

17.   Cardin, J. A., Carlén, M., Meletis, K., Knoblich, U., Zhang, F., Deisseroth, K., Tsai, L.
      H. & Moore, C. I. Driving fast-spiking cells induces gamma rhythm and controls
      sensory responses. Nature 459, 663–667 (2009).

18.   Zhang, F., Wang, L. P., Brauner, M., Liewald, J. F., Kay, K., Watzke, N., Wood, P. G.,
      Bamberg, E., Nagel, G., Gottschalk, A. & Deisseroth, K. Multimodal fast optical
      interrogation of neural circuitry. Nature 446, 633–639 (2007).

19.   Li, X., Gutierrez, D. V., Hanson, M. G., Han, J., Mark, M. D., Chiel, H., Hegemann, P.,
      Landmesser, L. T. & Herlitze, S. Fast noninvasive activation and inhibition of neural
      and network activity by vertebrate rhodopsin and green algae channelrhodopsin. Proc.
      Natl. Acad. Sci. 102, 17816–17821 (2005).

20.   Tsai, H. C., Zhang, F., Adamantidis, A., Stuber, G. D., Bond, A., De Lecea, L. &
      Deisseroth, K. Phasic firing in dopaminergic neurons is sufficient for behavioral
      conditioning. Science (80-. ). 324, 1080–1084 (2009).

21.   Szobota, S., Gorostiza, P., Del Bene, F., Wyart, C., Fortin, D. L., Kolstad, K. D.,
      Tulyathan, O., Volgraf, M., Numano, R., Aaron, H. L., Scott, E. K., Kramer, R. H.,
      Flannery, J., Baier, H., Trauner, D. & Isacoff, E. Y. Remote Control of Neuronal
      Activity with a Light-Gated Glutamate Receptor. Neuron 54, 535–545 (2007).

22.   Huber, D., Petreanu, L., Ghitani, N., Ranade, S., Hromádka, T., Mainen, Z. &
      Svoboda, K. Sparse optical microstimulation in barrel cortex drives learned behaviour


                                              144


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      in freely moving mice. Nature 451, 61–64 (2008).

23.   Curtis, J. C. & Kleinfeld, D. Phase-to-rate transformations encode touch in cortical
      neurons of a scanning sensorimotor system. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 492–501 (2009).

24.   O’Connor, D. H., Huber, D. & Svoboda, K. Reverse engineering the mouse brain.
      Nature 461, 923–929 (2009).

25.   Ohki, K., Chung, S., Ch’ng, Y. H., Kara, P. & Reid, R. C. Functional imaging with
      cellular resolution reveals precise microarchitecture in visual cortex. Nature 433, 597–
      603 (2005).

26.   Peron, S. & Svoboda, K. From cudgel to scalpel: Toward precise neural control with
      optogenetics. Nat. Methods 8, 30–34 (2011).

27.   Papagiakoumou, E. Optical developments for optogenetics. Biol. Cell 105, 443–464
      (2013).

28.   Ronzitti, E., Ventalon, C., Canepari, M., Forget, B. C., Papagiakoumou, E. & Emiliani,
      V. Recent advances in patterned photostimulation for optogenetics. J. Opt. (United
      Kingdom) 19, 113001 (2017).

29.   Papagiakoumou, E., Ronzitti, E., Chen, I.-W., Gajowa, M., Picot, A. & Emiliani, V.
      Two-Photon Optogenetics by Computer-Generated Holography. in Neuromethods vol.
      133 175–197 (2018).

30.   Benninger, R. K. P. & Piston, D. W. Two-photon excitation microscopy for unit 4.11
      the study of living cells and tissues. Current Protocols in Cell Biology (2013).
      doi:10.1002/0471143030.cb0411s59.

31.   Rumi, M. & Perry, J. W. Two-photon absorption: an overview of measurements and
      principles. Adv. Opt. Photonics 2, 451 (2010).

32.   Xu, C. & Webb, W. W. Multiphoton Excitation of Molecular Fluorophores and
      Nonlinear Laser Microscopy. in Topics in Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Volume 5:
      Nonlinear and Two-Photon-Induced Fluorescence (ed. Lakowicz, J. R.) 471–540
      (Springer US, 2002). doi:10.1007/0-306-47070-5_11.

33.   Denk, W., Strickler, J. H. & Webb, W. W. Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence
      microscopy. Science (80-. ). 248, 73–76 (1990).

34.   So, P. T. C., Dong, C. Y., Masters, B. R. & Berland, K. M. Two-Photon Excitation
      Fluorescence Microscopy. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2, 399–429 (2000).

                                             145


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

35.   Zipfel, W. R., Williams, R. M. & Webb, W. W. Nonlinear magic: Multiphoton
      microscopy in the biosciences. Nat. Biotechnol. 21, 1369–1377 (2003).

36.   Feldbauer, K., Zimmermann, D., Pintschovius, V., Spitz, J., Bamann, C. & Bamberg,
      E. Channelrhodopsin-2 is a leaky proton pump. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106,
      12317–12322 (2009).

37.   Papagiakoumou, E., Anselmi, F., Bègue, A., de Sars, V., Glückstad, J., Isacoff, E. Y. &
      Emiliani, V. Scanless two-photon excitation of channelrhodopsin-2. Nat. Methods 7,
      848–854 (2010).

38.   Lutz, C., Otis, T. S., DeSars, V., Charpak, S., DiGregorio, D. A. & Emiliani, V.
      Holographic photolysis of caged neurotransmitters. Nat. Methods 5, 821–827 (2008).

39.   Papagiakoumou, E., de Sars, V., Oron, D. & Emiliani, V. Patterned two-photon
      illumination by spatiotemporal shaping of ultrashort pulses. Opt. Express 16, 22039
      (2008).

40.   Oron, D., Tal, E. & Silberberg, Y. Scanningless depth-resolved microscopy. Opt.
      Express 13, 1468 (2005).

41.   Bègue, A., Papagiakoumou, E., Leshem, B., Conti, R., Enke, L., Oron, D. & Emiliani,
      V. Two-photon excitation in scattering media by spatiotemporally shaped beams and
      their application in optogenetic stimulation. Biomed. Opt. Express 4, 2869–79 (2013).

42.   Chaigneau, E., Ronzitti, E., Gajowa, M. A., Soler-Llavina, G. J., Tanese, D., Brureau,
      A. Y. B., Papagiakoumou, E., Zeng, H. & Emiliani, V. Two-Photon Holographic
      Stimulation of ReaChR. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 10, 234 (2016).

43.   Chen, I.-W., Ronzitti, E., R., B. L., L., T. D., Zeng, H., Papagiakoumou, E. & Emiliani,
      V. Parallel holographic illumination enables sub-millisecond two-photon optogenetic
      activation in mouse visual cortex in vivo. BioArxiv 1–21 (2017) doi:10.1101/250795.

44.   Picot, A. 2P optogenetics : simulation and modeling for optimized thermal dissipation
      and current integration. (2018).

45.   Upputuri, P. K. & Pramanik, M. Photoacoustic imaging in the second near-infrared
      window: a review. J. Biomed. Opt. 24, 1 (2019).

46.   Boulnois, J. L. Photophysical processes in recent medical laser developments: A
      review. Lasers Med. Sci. 1, 47–66 (1986).

47.   Vogel, A., Noack, J., Hüttman, G. & Paltauf, G. Mechanisms of femtosecond laser

                                            146


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      nanosurgery of cells and tissues. Appl. Phys. B Lasers Opt. 81, 1015–1047 (2005).

48.   Elwassif, M. M., Kong, Q., Vazquez, M. & Bikson, M. Bio-heat transfer model of deep
      brain stimulation-induced temperature changes. J. Neural Eng. 3, 306–315 (2006).

49.   Hodgkin, A. L. & Katz, B. The effect of sodium ions on the electrical activity of the
      giant axon of the squid. J. Physiol. J. Physiol. Online UNIV UTAH 108, 37–77 (1949).

50.   Reig, R., Mattia, M., Compte, a, Belmonte, C. & Sanchez-Vives, M. V. Temperature
      modulation of slow and fast cortical rhythms. J. Neurophysiol. 103, 1253–1261 (2010).

51.   Stujenske, J. M., Spellman, T. & Gordon, J. A. Modeling the Spatiotemporal Dynamics
      of Light and Heat Propagation for InVivo Optogenetics. Cell Rep. 12, 525–534 (2015).

52.   Plaksin, M., Shapira, E., Kimmel, E. & Shoham, S. Thermal Transients Excite Neurons
      through Universal Intramembrane Mechanoelectrical Effects. Phys. Rev. X 8, 11043
      (2018).

53.   Shibasaki, K., Suzuki, M., Mizuno, A. & Tominaga, M. Effects of Body Temperature
      on Neural Activity in the Hippocampus: Regulation of Resting Membrane Potentials
      by Transient Receptor Potential Vanilloid 4. J. Neurosci. 27, 1566–1575 (2007).

54.   Wells, J., Kao, C., Konrad, P., Milner, T., Kim, J., Mahadevan-Jansen, A. & Jansen, E.
      D. Biophysical Mechanisms of Transient Optical Stimulation of Peripheral Nerve.
      Biophys. J. 93, 2567–2580 (2007).

55.   Andersen, P. & Moser, E. Brain Temperature and Hippocampal Function.
      Hippocampus 5, 491–498 (1995).

56.   Thompson, S. M., Masukawa, L. M. & Prince, D. A. Temperature dependence of
      intrinsic membrane properties and synaptic potentials in hippocampal CA1 neurons in
      vitro. J. Neurosci. 5, 817–24 (1985).

57.   Deng, W., Goldys, E. M., Farnham, M. M. J. & Pilowsky, P. M. Optogenetics, the
      intersection between physics and neuroscience: light stimulation of neurons in
      physiological conditions. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 307, R1292-
      302 (2014).

58.   Thomsen, S. Pathologic Analysis of Photothermal and Photomechanical Effects of
      Laser Tissue Interactions. Photochem. Photobiol. 53, 825–835 (1991).

59.   Dewhirst, M. W., Viglianti, B. L., Lora-Michiels, M., Hanson, M. & Hoopes, P. J.
      Basic principles of thermal dosimetry and thermal thresholds for tissue damage from

                                              147


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      hyperthermia. Int. J. Hyperth. 19, 267–294 (2003).

60.   Lepock, J. R. Cellular effects of hyperthermia: Relevance to the minimum dose for
      thermal damage. Int. J. Hyperth. 19, 252–266 (2003).

61.   Fourier, J.-B.-J. Théorie analytique de la chaleur. (F. Didot, 1822).

62.   Pennes, H. H. Analysis of Tissue and Arterial Blood Temperatures in the Resting
      Human Forearm. J. Appl. Physiol. 1, 93–122 (1948).

63.   Picot, A., Dominguez, S., Liu, C., Chen, I. W., Tanese, D., Ronzitti, E., Berto, P.,
      Papagiakoumou, E., Oron, D., Tessier, G., Forget, B. C. & Emiliani, V. Temperature
      Rise under Two-Photon Optogenetic Brain Stimulation. Cell Rep. 24, 1243-1253.e5
      (2018).

64.   Carslaw, H. S., Jaeger, J. C. J., Carslaw 1870-1954, H. S. (Horatio S. & Jaeger, J. C. J.
      Conduction of Heat in Solids. (Clarendon Press, 1959).

65.   Gerchberg, R. W. & Saxton, W. O. A practical algorithm for the determination of
      phase from image and diffraction plane pictures. Optik (Stuttg). 35, 237–246 (1972).

66.   Goodman, J. W. Introduction to Fourier Optics McGraw-Hill Series in Electrical and
      Computer Engineering. Quantum Semiclassical Opt. J. Eur. Opt. Soc. Part B 8, 491
      (1996).

67.   Cheng, X., Li, Y., Mertz, J., Sakadžić, S., Devor, A., Boas, D. A. & Tian, L.
      Development of a beam propagation method to simulate the point spread function
      degradation in scattering media. Opt. Lett. 44, 4989 (2019).

68.   Schott, S., Bertolotti, J., Léger, J.-F., Bourdieu, L. & Gigan, S. Characterization of the
      angular memory effect of scattered light in biological tissues. Opt. Express 23, 13505
      (2015).

69.   Roey, J. Van, Donk, J. Van Der & Lagasse, P. E. Beam-propagation method : analysis
      and assessment Ear ) = JJJ. 71, (1981).

70.   Papagiakoumou, E., Bègue, A., Leshem, B., Schwartz, O., Stell, B. M., Bradley, J.,
      Oron, D. & Emiliani, V. Functional patterned multiphoton excitation deep inside
      scattering tissue. Nat. Photonics 7, 274–278 (2013).

71.   Childs, P. R. N., Greenwood, J. R. & Long, C. A. Review of temperature measurement.
      Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71, 2959–2978 (2000).

72.   Nicholas, J. V & Webster, J. G. Liquid-in-glass thermometers. in The Measurement
                                              148


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      Instrumentation and Sensors Handbook (CRC Press New York, 1999).

73.   Wise, J. A. Liquid-in-Glass Thermometry. U.S. Department of Commerce, National
      Bureau of Standards vol. 150 (US Department of Commerce, National Bureau of
      Standards, 1976).

74.   Howard, E. Thermostatic Bimetal. Eng. Sci. 5, 16–24 (1942).

75.   Stephenson, R. J. Bimaterials Thermometers—The Measurement Instrumentation and
      Sensors Handbook. (1999).

76.   Divita, R. V. Bimetal thermometer selection. Meas. Control 93–95 (1994).

77.   Gao, Y. & Bando, Y. Carbon nanothermometer containing gallium. Nature 415, 599
      (2002).

78.   Pollock, D. Thermocouples: theory and properties. (Routledge, 2018).

79.   Kinzie, P. A. & Rubin, L. G. Thermocouple temperature measurement. PhT 26, 52
      (1973).

80.   Riddle, J. L., Furukawa, G. T. & Plumb, H. H. Platinum resistance thermometry. vol.
      126 (National Bureau of Standards, 1973).

81.   Szmyrka-Grzebyk, A. & Lipiński, L. Linear diode thermometer in the 4–300 K
      temperature range. Cryogenics (Guildf). 35, 281–284 (1995).

82.   Grattan, K. T. V & Zhang, Z. Y. Fiber Optic Fluorescence Thermometry. in Topics in
      Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Probe Design and Chemical Sensing (ed. Lakowicz, J. R.)
      335–376 (Springer US, 1994). doi:10.1007/0-306-47060-8_11.

83.   Beheim, G. Fiber-optic temperature sensor using a thin-film Fabry-Perot
      interferometer. (1997).

84.   Lawless, W. N., Clark, C. F. & Arenz, R. W. Method for measuring specific heats in
      intense magnetic fields at low temperatures using capacitance thermometry. Rev. Sci.
      Instrum. 53, 1647–1652 (1982).

85.   Walker, G. W., Sundar, V. C., Rudzinski, C. M., Wun, A. W., Bawendi, M. G. &
      Nocera, D. G. Quantum-dot optical temperature probes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 3555–
      3557 (2003).

86.   Zhang, Y. & Chen, J. Thermometry based on Coulomb-coupled quantum dots. Phys. E
      Low-Dimensional Syst. Nanostructures 114, 113635 (2019).


                                            149


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

87.   Ross, D., Gaitan, M. & Locascio, L. E. Temperature measurement in microfluidic
      systems using a temperature-dependent fluorescent dye. Anal. Chem. 73, 4117–4123
      (2001).

88.   Wang, F., Tan, W. B., Zhang, Y., Fan, X. & Wang, M. Luminescent nanomaterials for
      biological labelling. Nanotechnology 17, (2006).

89.   Yang, G., Liu, X., Feng, J., Li, S. & Li, Y. Organic Dye Thermometry. (2015).

90.   Bousseksou, A., Molnár, G., Salmon, L. & Nicolazzi, W. Molecular spin crossover
      phenomenon: Recent achievements and prospects. Chem. Soc. Rev. 40, 3313–3335
      (2011).

91.   Cerruti, M. G., Sauthier, M., Leonard, D., Liu, D., Duscher, G., Feldheim, D. L. &
      Franzen, S. Gold and silica-coated gold nanoparticles as thermographic labels for DNA
      detection. Anal. Chem. 78, 3282–3288 (2006).

92.   Kolodner, P. & Tyson, J. A. Remote thermal imaging with 0.7-μm spatial resolution
      using temperature-dependent fluorescent thin flims. Appl. Phys. Lett. 42, 117–119
      (1983).

93.   Assy, A., Lin, H. J., Schoenauer-Sebag, M., Gredin, P., Mortier, M., Billot, L., Chen,
      Z. & Aigouy, L. Nanoscale thermometry with fluorescent yttrium-based Er/Yb-doped
      fluoride nanocrystals. Sensors Actuators, A Phys. 250, 71–77 (2016).

94.   Aigouy, L., Sadi, E., Lalouat, L., Lab́ guerie-Eǵa, J., Mortier, M., Löw, P. & Bergaud,
      C. AC thermal imaging of a microwire with a fluorescent nanocrystal: Influence of the
      near field on the thermal contrast. J. Appl. Phys. 106, (2009).

95.   Saïdi, E., Samson, B., Aigouy, L., Volz, S., Löw, P., Bergaud, C. & Mortier, M.
      Scanning thermal imaging by near-field fluorescence spectroscopy. Nanotechnology
      20, 115703 (2009).

96.   Okabe, K., Inada, N., Gota, C., Harada, Y., Funatsu, T. & Uchiyama, S. Intracellular
      temperature mapping with a fluorescent polymeric thermometer and fluorescence
      lifetime imaging microscopy. Nat. Commun. 3, (2012).

97.   Stasiek, J., Stasiek, A., Jewartowski, M. & Collins, M. W. Liquid crystal thermography
      and true-colour digital image processing. Opt. Laser Technol. 38, 243–256 (2006).

98.   Srinath, V. E. & Je-Chin, H. A transient liquid crystal thermography technique for gas
      turbine heat transfer measurements. Meas. Sci. Technol. 11, 957 (2000).

                                             150


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

99.   Wolfbeis, O. S. Sensor paints. Adv. Mater. 20, 3759–3763 (2008).

100. Beckman, K. A., Graham, J. A., Examiner-thurman, P., Beckman, K. A. & Graham, J.
      A. Infrared thermometry system and method. (1990).

101. Fuchs, M. & Tanner, C. B. Infrared Thermometry of Vegetation. Agron. J. 58, 597–601
      (1966).

102. Ring, E. F. J. & Ammer, K. Infrared thermal imaging in medicine. Physiol. Meas. 33,
      (2012).

103. Baffou, G., Bon, P., Savatier, J., Polleux, J., Zhu, M., Merlin, M., Rigneault, H. &
      Monneret, S. Thermal imaging of nanostructures by quantitative optical phase analysis.
      ACS Nano 6, 2452–2458 (2012).

104. Berto, P., Ureña, E. B., Bon, P., Quidant, R., Rigneault, H. & Baffou, G. Quantitative
      absorption spectroscopy of nano-objects. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.
      86, 1–5 (2012).

105. Hall, R. J. & Bonczyk, P. A. Sooting flame thermometry using emission/absorption
      tomography. Appl. Opt. 29, 4590 (1990).

106. Shimizu, S., Sakai, S., Nomura, T. & Wakai, K. Measurement of Flame Temperature
      Distribution by Infrared-Rays Computed Tomography. Trans. Japan Soc. Mech. Eng.
      Ser. B 53, 3803–3809 (1987).

107. Smith, J. D., Cappa, C. D., Drisdell, W. S., Cohen, R. C. & Saykally, R. J. Raman
      thermometry measurements of free evaporation from liquid water droplets. J. Am.
      Chem. Soc. 128, 12892–12898 (2006).

108. LaPlant, F., Laurence, G. & Ben-Amotz, D. Theoretical and experimental uncertainty
      in temperature measurement of materials by Raman spectroscopy. Appl. Spectrosc. 50,
      1034–1038 (1996).

109. Barat, R. B., Longwell, J. P., Sarofim, A. F., Smith, S. P. & Bar-Ziv, E. Laser Rayleigh
      scattering for flame thermometry in a toroidal jet stirred combustor. Appl. Opt. 30,
      3003 (1991).

110. Murphy, A. B. & Farmer, A. J. D. Temperature measurement in thermal plasmas by
      rayleigh scattering. J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 25, 634–643 (1992).

111. Hall, R. J. & Boedeker, L. R. CARS thermometry in fuel-rich combustion zones. Appl.
      Opt. 23, 1340 (1984).

                                             151


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

112. Herring, G. C., Roberts, W. L., Brown, M. S. & DeBarber, P. A. Temperature
      measurement by degenerate four-wave mixing with strong absorption of the excitation
      beams. Appl. Opt. 35, 6544 (1996).

113. Goss, L. P., Smith, A. A. & Post, M. E. Surface thermometry by laser‐induced
      fluorescence. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 60, 3702–3706 (1989).

114. Owen, S. F., Liu, M. H. & Kreitzer, A. C. Thermal constraints on in vivo optogenetic
      manipulations. Nat. Neurosci. 22, 1061–1065 (2019).

115. Arias-Gil, G., Ohl, F. W., Takagaki, K. & Lippert, M. T. Measurement, modeling, and
      prediction of temperature rise due to optogenetic brain stimulation. Neurophotonics 3,
      045007 (2016).

116. Zhou, J., del Rosal, B., Jaque, D., Uchiyama, S. & Jin, D. Advances and challenges for
      fluorescence nanothermometry. Nat. Methods 17, 967–980 (2020).

117. del Rosal, B., Ximendes, E., Rocha, U. & Jaque, D. In Vivo Luminescence
      Nanothermometry: from Materials to Applications. Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, (2017).

118. Van Herwaarden, a. W. W., Sarro, P. M. M. & Van Herwaarden, a. W. W. Thermal
      sensors based on the seebeck effect. Sensors and Actuators 10, 321–346 (1986).

119. Podgorski, K. & Ranganathan, G. Brain heating induced by near-infrared lasers during
      multiphoton microscopy. J. Neurophysiol. 116, 1012–1023 (2016).

120. Shin, Y., Yoo, M., Kim, H.-S., Nam, S.-K., Kim, H.-I., Lee, S.-K., Kim, S. & Kwon,
      H.-S. Characterization of fiber-optic light delivery and light-induced temperature
      changes in a rodent brain for precise optogenetic neuromodulation. Biomed. Opt.
      Express 7, 4450 (2016).

121. AEROPAK®Mineral Insulated Thermocouple. https://www.okazaki-
      mfg.com/en/BasicProducts/Aeropak.html.

122. Rajagopal, M. C., Valavala, K. V., Gelda, D., Ma, J. & Sinha, S. Fabrication and
      characterization of thermocouple probe for use in intracellular thermometry. Sensors
      Actuators, A Phys. 272, 253–258 (2018).

123. Balčytis, A., Ryu, M., Juodkazis, S. & Morikawa, J. Micro-thermocouple on nano-
      membrane: Thermometer for nanoscale measurements. Sci. Rep. 8, 8–13 (2018).

124. Young, H. D. & Sears, F. W. University physics. (Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1992).

125. Usamentiaga, R., Venegas, P., Guerediaga, J., Vega, L., Molleda, J. & Bulnes, F. G.
                                             152


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      Infrared thermography for temperature measurement and non-destructive testing.
      Sensors (Switzerland) 14, 12305–12348 (2014).

126. Jaque, D. & Vetrone, F. Luminescence nanothermometry. Nanoscale 4, 4301 (2012).

127. Donner, J. S., Thompson, S. A., Kreuzer, M. P., Baffou, G. & Quidant, R. Mapping
      intracellular temperature using green fluorescent protein. Nano Lett. 12, 2107–2111
      (2012).

128. Dramićanin, M. D. Trends in luminescence thermometry. J. Appl. Phys. 128, (2020).

129. Samson, B., Aigouy, L., Latempa, R., Tessier, G., Aprili, M., Mortier, M., Lesueur, J.
      & Fournier, D. Scanning thermal imaging of an electrically excited aluminum
      microstripe. J. Appl. Phys. 102, (2007).

130. Aigouy, L., Tessier, G., Mortier, M. & Charlot, B. Scanning thermal imaging of
      microelectronic circuits with a fluorescent nanoprobe. Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 184105
      (2005).

131. Rivera, V. A. G., Ferri, F. A. & Marega, E. Localized Surface Plasmon Resonances:
      Noble Metal Nanoparticle Interaction with Rare-Earth Ions. Plasmon. - Princ. Appl.
      (2012) doi:10.5772/50753.

132. Aigouy, L., De Wilde, Y., Mortier, M., Giérak, J. & Bourhis, E. Fabrication and
      characterization of fluorescent rare-earth-doped glass-particle-based tips for near-field
      optical imaging applications. Appl. Opt. 43, 3829–3837 (2004).

133. Vetrone, F., Naccache, R., Zamarrón, A., De La Fuente, A. J., Sanz-Rodríguez, F.,
      Maestro, L. M., Rodriguez, E. M., Jaque, D., Sole, J. G., Capobianco, J. A., Zamarrón,
      A., Juarranz de la Fuente, A., Sanz-Rodríguez, F., Martinez Maestro, L., Martín
      Rodriguez, E., Jaque, D., García Solé, J. & Capobianco, J. A. Temperature sensing
      using fluorescent nanothermometers. ACS Nano 4, 3254–3258 (2010).

134. Zhang, R., Zhang, J., Xie, M. & Chen, J. Optical characteristics of Agarose gel.
      Hongwai yu Jiguang Gongcheng/Infrared Laser Eng. 45, 1–7 (2016).

135. Zhang, M., Che, Z., Chen, J., Zhao, H., Yang, L., Zhong, Z. & Lu, J. Experimental
      determination of thermal conductivity of water-agar gel at different concentrations and
      temperatures. J. Chem. Eng. Data 56, 859–864 (2011).

136. Hernandez, O., Papagiakoumou, E., Tanesee, D., Felin, K., Wyart, C. & Emiliani, V.
      Three-dimensional spatiotemporal focusing of holographic patterns. Nat. Commun. 7,

                                             153


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      11928 (2016).

137. Yaroslavsky, A. N., Schulze, P. C., Yaroslavsky, I. V., Schober, R., Ulrich, F. &
      Schwarzmaier, H. J. Optical properties of selected native and coagulated human brain
      tissues in vitro in the visible and near infrared spectral range. Phys. Med. Biol. 47,
      2059–2073 (2002).

138. Blumm, J. & Lindemann, A. Characterization of the thermophysical properties of
      molten polymers and liquids using the flash technique. High Temp. - High Press. 35–
      36, 627–632 (2003).

139. Yizhar, O., Fenno, L. E., Davidson, T. J., Mogri, M. & Deisseroth, K. Optogenetics in
      Neural Systems. Neuron 71, 9–34 (2011).

140. Double-Clad Fiber.
      https://www.thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=8950.

141. Li, A. H., Sun, Z. J. & Lü, Q. Laser heating effect on the power dependence of
      upconversion luminescence in Er3+-doped nanopowders. J. Nanoparticle Res. 15,
      (2013).

142. Manzani, D., Petruci, J. F. D. S., Nigoghossian, K., Cardoso, A. A. & Ribeiro, S. J. L.
      A portable luminescent thermometer based on green up-conversion emission of
      Er3+/Yb3+ co-doped tellurite glass. Sci. Rep. 7, 1–11 (2017).

143. Ronzitti, E., Conti, R., Zampini, V., Tanese, D., Foust, A. J., Klapoetke, N., Boyden, E.
      S., Papagiakoumou, E. & Emiliani, V. Sub-millisecond optogenetic control of neuronal
      firing with two-photon holographic photoactivation of Chronos. J. Neurosci. 1246–17
      (2017) doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1246-17.2017.

144. Jacques, S. L. Erratum: Optical properties of biological tissues: A review (Physics in
      Medicine and Biology (2013) 58). Phys. Med. Biol. 58, 5007–5008 (2013).

145. Horton, N. G., Wang, K., Kobat, D., Clark, C. G., Wise, F. W., Schaffer, C. B. & Xu,
      C. In vivo three-photon microscopy of subcortical structures within an intact mouse
      brain. Nat. Photonics 7, 205–209 (2013).

146. Bernstein, J. G., Garrity, P. A. & Boyden, E. S. Optogenetics and thermogenetics:
      Technologies for controlling the activity of targeted cells within intact neural circuits.
      Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 22, 61–71 (2012).

147. Bath, D. E., Stowers, J. R., Hörmann, D., Poehlmann, A., Dickson, B. J. & Straw, A.

                                              154


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      D. FlyMAD: Rapid thermogenetic control of neuronal activity in freely walking
      Drosophila. Nat. Methods 11, 756–762 (2014).

148. Ermakova, Y. G., Lanin, A. A., Fedotov, I. V., Roshchin, M., Kelmanson, I. V., Kulik,
      D., Bogdanova, Y. A., Shokhina, A. G., Bilan, D. S., Staroverov, D. B., Balaban, P.
      M., Fedotov, A. B., Sidorov-Biryukov, D. A., Nikitin, E. S., Zheltikov, A. M. &
      Belousov, V. V. Thermogenetic neurostimulation with single-cell resolution. Nat.
      Commun. 8, 15362 (2017).

149. Connor, E. E., Mwamuka, J., Gole, A., Murphy, C. J. & Wyatt, M. D. Gold
      nanoparticles are taken up by human cells but do not cause acute cytotoxicity. Small 1,
      325–327 (2005).

150. Boisselier, E. & Astruc, D. Gold nanoparticles in nanomedicine: preparations, imaging,
      diagnostics, therapies and toxicity. Chem. Soc. Rev. 38, 1759–1782 (2009).

151. Brayner, R. The toxicological impact of nanoparticles. Nano Today 3, 48–55 (2008).

152. Stern, J. M., Stanfield, J., Kabbani, W., Hsieh, J.-T. & Cadeddu, J. A. Selective
      prostate cancer thermal ablation with laser activated gold nanoshells. J. Urol. 179,
      748–753 (2008).

153. Rastinehad, A. R., Anastos, H., Wajswol, E., Winoker, J. S., Sfakianos, J. P.,
      Doppalapudi, S. K., Carrick, M. R., Knauer, C. J., Taouli, B., Lewis, S. C., Tewari, A.
      K., Schwartz, J. A., Canfield, S. E., George, A. K., West, J. L. & Halas, N. J. Gold
      nanoshell-localized photothermal ablation of prostate tumors in a clinical pilot device
      study. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116, 18590–18596 (2019).

154. Carvalho-de-Souza, J. L., Treger, J. S., Dang, B., Kent, S. B. H., Pepperberg, D. R. &
      Bezanilla, F. Photosensitivity of neurons enabled by cell-targeted gold nanoparticles.
      Neuron 86, 207–217 (2015).

155. Baffou, G., Ureña, E. B., Berto, P., Monneret, S., Quidant, R. & Rigneault, H.
      Deterministic temperature shaping using plasmonic nanoparticle assemblies. Nanoscale
      6, 8984–8989 (2014).

156. Baffou, G. & Quidant, R. Thermo-plasmonics: Using metallic nanostructures as nano-
      sources of heat. Laser Photonics Rev. 7, 171–187 (2013).

157. Baffou, G., Quidant, R. & García De Abajo, F. J. Nanoscale control of optical heating
      in complex plasmonic systems. ACS Nano 4, 709–716 (2010).


                                             155


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

158. Myroshnychenko, V., Rodríguez-Fernández, J., Pastoriza-Santos, I., Funston, A. M.,
      Novo, C., Mulvaney, P., Liz-Marzán, L. M. & García de Abajo, F. J. Modelling the
      optical response of gold nanoparticles. Chem. Soc. Rev. 37, 1792–1805 (2008).

159. Baffou, G. & Rigneault, H. Femtosecond-pulsed optical heating of gold nanoparticles.
      Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 84, 1–13 (2011).

160. Khlebtsov, B., Zharov, V., Melnikov, A., Tuchin, V. & Khlebtsov, N. Optical
      amplification of photothermal therapy with gold nanoparticles and nanoclusters.
      Nanotechnology 17, 5167–5179 (2006).

161. Chen, H., Shao, L., Ming, T., Sun, Z., Zhao, C., Yang, B. & Wang, J. Understanding
      the photothermal conversion efficiency of gold nanocrystals. Small 6, 2272–2280
      (2010).

162. Govorov, A. O., Zhang, W., Skeini, T., Richardson, H., Lee, J. & Kotov, N. A. Gold
      nanoparticle ensembles as heaters and actuators: Melting and collective plasmon
      resonances. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 1, 84–90 (2006).

163. Baffou, G., Girard, C. & Quidant, R. Mapping heat origin in plasmonic structures.
      Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 1–4 (2010).

164. Baffou, G. Thermodynamics of Metal Nanoparticles. in Thermoplasmonics 36–80
      (Cambridge University Press, 2017). doi:10.1017/9781108289801.004.

165. Polleux, J., Rasp, M., Louban, I., Plath, N., Feldhoff, A. & Spatz, J. P. Benzyl alcohol
      and block copolymer micellar lithography: A versatile route to assembling gold and in
      situ generated titania nanoparticles into uniform binary nanoarrays. ACS Nano 5, 6355–
      6364 (2011).

166. Baffou, G., Berto, P., Bermúdez Ureña, E., Quidant, R., Monneret, S., Polleux, J. &
      Rigneault, H. Photoinduced heating of nanoparticle arrays. ACS Nano 7, 6478–6488
      (2013).

167. Calculateur javascript pour la diffusion de Mie. https://saviot.cnrs.fr/mie/index.html.

168. Thormählen, I., Straub, J. & Grigull, U. Refractive Index of Water and Its Dependence
      on Wavelength, Temperature, and Density. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 14, 933–945
      (1985).

169. Cao, Z., Jiang, L., Wang, S., Wang, M., Liu, D., Wang, P., Zhang, F. & Lu, Y. All-
      glass extrinsic Fabry – Perot interferometer thermo-optic coefficient sensor based on a

                                             156


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      capillary bridged two fiber ends. Appl. Opt. 54, 2371–2375 (2015).

170. Ghosh, G. Handbook of Thermo-Optic Coefficients of Optical Materials with
      Applications. Chemistry &amp; vol. 5 (1998).

171. Primot, J. & Sogno, L. Achromatic three-wave (or more) lateral shearing
      interferometer. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 12, 2679–2685 (1995).

172. Chanteloup, J.-C. Multiple-wave lateral shearing interferometry for wave-front sensing.
      Appl. Opt. 44, 1559–1571 (2005).

173. Balderas-López, J. A., Mandelis, A. & Garcia, J. A. Thermal-wave resonator cavity
      design and measurements of the thermal diffusivity of liquids. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 71,
      2933–2937 (2000).

174. Berto, P., Mohamed, M. S. A., Rigneault, H. & Baffou, G. Time-harmonic optical
      heating of plasmonic nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 90,
      1–12 (2014).

175. Thalhammer, G., Bowman, R. W., Love, G. D., Padgett, M. J. & Ritsch-Marte, M.
      Speeding up liquid crystal SLMs using overdrive with phase change reduction. Opt.
      Express 21, 1779–1797 (2013).

176. Bouchard, M. B., Voleti, V., Mendes, C. S., Lacefield, C., Grueber, W. B., Mann, R.
      S., Bruno, R. M. & Hillman, E. M. C. C. Swept confocally-aligned planar excitation
      (SCAPE) microscopy for high-speed volumetric imaging of behaving organisms. Nat.
      Photonics 9, 113–119 (2015).

177. Ehrlicher, A., Betz, T., Stuhrmann, B., Koch, D., Milner, V., Raizen, M. G. & Kas, J.
      Guiding neuronal growth with light. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99, 16024–16028 (2002).

178. Guillon, M., Forget, B. C., Foust, A. J., De Sars, V., Ritsch-Marte, M. & Emiliani, V.
      Vortex-free phase profiles for uniform patterning with computer-generated holography.
      Opt. Express 25, 12640 (2017).

179. Jesacher, A., Maurer, C., Schwaighofer, A., Bernet, S. & Ritsch-Marte, M. Near-
      perfect hologram reconstruction with a spatial light modulator. Opt Express 16, 2597–
      2603 (2008).

180. Curtis, A. S. G. THE MECHANISM OF ADHESION OF CELLS TO GLASS : A
      Study by Interference Reflection Microscopy . J. Cell Biol. 20, 199–215 (1964).

181. Paris, L., Marc, I., Charlot, B., Dumas, M., Valmier, J. & Bardin, F. Millisecond

                                             157


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      infrared laser pulses depolarize and elicit action potentials on in-vitro dorsal root
      ganglion neurons. Biomed. Opt. Express 8, 4568 (2017).

182. Berto, P., Philippet, L., Osmond, J., Liu, C. F., Afridi, A., Montagut Marques, M.,
      Molero Agudo, B., Tessier, G. & Quidant, R. Tunable and free-form planar optics. Nat.
      Photonics 13, 649–656 (2019).

183. Lin, M. Z. & Schnitzer, M. J. Genetically encoded indicators of neuronal activity. Nat.
      Neurosci. 19, 1142–1153 (2016).

184. Sequential dendritic voltage imaging and dendritic calcium imaging.
      https://health.uconn.edu/antic-lab/image-gallery/.

185. Göbel, W. & Helmchen, F. New angles on neuronal dendrites in vivo. J. Neurophysiol.
      98, 3770–3779 (2007).

186. Beaurepaire, E. & Mertz, J. Epifluorescence collection in two-photon microscopy.
      Appl. Opt. 41, 5376 (2002).

187. Grewe, B. F., Voigt, F. F., van ’t Hoff, M. & Helmchen, F. Fast two-layer two-photon
      imaging of neuronal cell populations using an electrically tunable lens. Biomed. Opt.
      Express 2, 2035 (2011).

188. Yang, W., Miller, J. eun K., Carrillo-Reid, L., Pnevmatikakis, E., Paninski, L., Yuste,
      R. & Peterka, D. S. Simultaneous Multi-plane Imaging of Neural Circuits. Neuron 89,
      269 (2016).

189. Kong, L., Tang, J., Little, J. P., Yu, Y., Lämmermann, T., Lin, C. P., Germain, R. N. &
      Cui, M. Continuous volumetric imaging via an optical phase-locked ultrasound lens.
      Nat. Methods 12, 759–762 (2015).

190. Iyer, V., Hoogland, T. M. & Saggau, P. Fast functional imaging of single neurons using
      random-access multiphoton (RAMP) microscopy. J. Neurophysiol. 95, 535–545
      (2006).

191. Prevedel, R., Verhoef, A. J., Pernía-Andrade, A. J., Weisenburger, S., Huang, B. S.,
      Nöbauer, T., Fernández, A., Delcour, J. E., Golshani, P., Baltuska, A. & Vaziri, A. Fast
      volumetric calcium imaging across multiple cortical layers using sculpted light. Nat.
      Methods 13, 1021–1028 (2016).

192. Nadella, K. M. N. S., Roš, H., Baragli, C., Griffiths, V. A., Konstantinou, G., Koimtzis,
      T., Evans, G. J., Kirkby, P. A. & Silver, R. A. Random-access scanning microscopy for

                                              158


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      3D imaging in awake behaving animals. Nat. Methods 13, 1001–1004 (2016).

193. Tomer, R., Lovett-Barron, M., Kauvar, I., Andalman, A., Burns, V. M., Sankaran, S.,
      Grosenick, L., Broxton, M., Yang, S. & Deisseroth, K. SPED Light Sheet Microscopy:
      Fast Mapping of Biological System Structure and Function. Cell 163, 1796–1806
      (2015).

194. Fahrbach, F. O., Voigt, F. F., Schmid, B., Helmchen, F. & Huisken, J. Rapid 3D light-
      sheet microscopy with a tunable lens. Opt. Express 21, 21010 (2013).

195. Cheng, A., Gonçalves, J. T., Golshani, P., Arisaka, K. & Portera-Cailliau, C.
      Simultaneous two-photon calcium imaging at different depths with spatiotemporal
      multiplexing. Nat. Methods 8, 139–142 (2011).

196. Kim, K. H., Buehler, C., Bahlmann, K., Ragan, T., Lee, W.-C. A., Nedivi, E., Heffer,
      E. L., Fantini, S. & So, P. T. C. Multifocal multiphoton microscopy based on
      multianode photomultiplier tubes. Opt. Express 15, 11658 (2007).

197. Pnevmatikakis, E. A., Soudry, D., Gao, Y., Machado, T. A., Merel, J., Pfau, D.,
      Reardon, T., Mu, Y., Lacefield, C., Yang, W., Ahrens, M., Bruno, R., Jessell, T. M.,
      Peterka, D. S., Yuste, R. & Paninski, L. Simultaneous Denoising, Deconvolution, and
      Demixing of Calcium Imaging Data. Neuron 89, 285–299 (2016).

198. Lu, R., Sun, W., Liang, Y., Kerlin, A., Bierfeld, J., Seelig, J. D., Wilson, D. E., Scholl,
      B., Mohar, B., Tanimoto, M., Koyama, M., Fitzpatrick, D., Orger, M. B. & Ji, N.
      Video-rate volumetric functional imaging of the brain at synaptic resolution. Nat.
      Neurosci. 20, 620–628 (2017).

199. Ducros, M., Houssen, Y. G., Bradley, J., De Sars, V. & Charpak, S. Encoded multisite
      two-photon microscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 13138–13143 (2013).

200. Mahou, P., Zimmerley, M., Loulier, K., Matho, K. S., Labroille, G., Morin, X.,
      Supatto, W., Livet, J., Débarre, D. & Beaurepaire, E. Multicolor two-photon tissue
      imaging by wavelength mixing. Nat. Methods 9, 815–818 (2012).

201. Yang, S. J., Allen, W. E., Kauvar, I., Andalman, A. S., Young, N. P., Kim, C. K.,
      Marshel, J. H., Wetzstein, G. & Deisseroth, K. Extended field-of-view and increased-
      signal 3D holographic illumination with time-division multiplexing. Opt. Express 23,
      32573 (2015).

202. Quirin, S., Peterka, D. S. & Yuste, R. Instantaneous three-dimensional sensing using


                                              159


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

      spatial light modulator illumination with extended depth of field imaging. Opt. Express
      21, 16007 (2013).

203. Quirin, S., Jackson, J., Peterka, D. S. & Yuste, R. Simultaneous imaging of neural
      activity in three dimensions. Front. Neural Circuits 8, 1–11 (2014).

204. Broxton, M., Grosenick, L., Yang, S., Cohen, N., Andalman, A., Deisseroth, K. &
      Levoy, M. Wave optics theory and 3-D deconvolution for the light field microscope.
      Opt. Express 21, 25418 (2013).

205. Prevedel, R., Yoon, Y.-G., Hoffmann, M., Pak, N., Wetzstein, G., Kato, S., Schrödel,
      T., Raskar, R., Zimmer, M., Boyden, E. S. & Vaziri, A. Simultaneous whole-animal 3D
      imaging of neuronal activity using light-field microscopy. Nat. Methods 11, 727–730
      (2014).

206. Maurer, C., Jesacher, A., Bernet, S. & Ritsch-Marte, M. What spatial light modulators
      can do for optical microscopy. Laser Photonics Rev. 5, 81–101 (2011).

207. Collins, D. R., Sampsell, J. B., Hornbeck, L. J., Florence, J. M., Penz, P. A. & Gately,
      M. T. Deformable mirror device spatial light modulators and their applicability to
      optical neural networks. Appl. Opt. 28, 4900 (1989).

208. Berge, B. & Peseux, J. Variable focal lens controlled by an external voltage: An
      application of electrowetting. Eur. Phys. J. E 3, 159–163 (2000).

209. Kuiper, S. & Hendriks, B. H. W. Variable-focus liquid lens for miniature cameras.
      Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 1128–1130 (2004).

210. Klapoetke, N. C., Murata, Y., Kim, S. S., Pulver, S. R., Birdsey-Benson, A., Cho, Y.
      K., Morimoto, T. K., Chuong, A. S., Carpenter, E. J., Tian, Z., Wang, J., Xie, Y., Yan,
      Z., Zhang, Y., Chow, B. Y., Surek, B., Melkonian, M., Jayaraman, V., Constantine-
      Paton, M., et al. Independent optical excitation of distinct neural populations. Nat.
      Methods 11, 338–346 (2014).

211. Zhang, D. Y., Lien, V., Berdichevsky, Y., Choi, J. & Lo, Y. H. Fluidic adaptive lens
      with high focal length tunability. Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 3171–3172 (2003).

212. Liebetraut, P., Petsch, S., Mönch, W. & Zappe, H. Tunable solid-body elastomer lenses
      with electromagnetic actuation. Appl. Opt. 50, 3268 (2011).

213. Yu, H., Zhou, G., Chau, F. S. & Sinha, S. K. Tunable electromagnetically actuated
      liquid-filled lens. Sensors Actuators, A Phys. 167, 602–607 (2011).

                                             160


Liu Chang – Thèse de doctorat - 2021

214. Xu, S., Ren, H., Lin, Y.-J., Moharam, M. G. J., Wu, S.-T. & Tabiryan, N. Adaptive
      liquid lens actuated by photo-polymer. Opt. Express 17, 17590 (2009).

215. Glebov, A. L., Huang, L., Aoki, S., Lee, M. & Yokouchi, K. Planar hybrid polymer-
      silica microlenses with tunable beamwidth and focal length. IEEE Photonics Technol.
      Lett. 16, 1107–1109 (2004).

216. Angelini, A., Pirani, F., Frascella, F. & Descrovi, E. Reconfigurable elastomeric
      graded-index optical elements controlled by light. Light Sci. Appl. 7, 1–9 (2018).

217. Dong, L., Agarwal, A. K., Beebe, D. J. & Jiang, H. Adaptive liquid microlenses
      activated by stimuli-responsive hydrogels. Nature 442, 551–554 (2006).

218. Radhakrishnan, T. S. Thermal degradation of poly(dimethylsilylene) and
      poly(tetramethyldisilylene-co-styrene). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 99, 2679–2686 (2006).

219. Markos, C., Vlachos, K. & Kakarantzas, G. Thermo-optic effect of an index guiding
      photonic crystal fiber with elastomer inclusions. 21st Int. Conf. Opt. Fiber Sensors
      7753, 775340 (2011).

220. Xu, J. & Zhuang, S. Measurement of lens focal length with Hartmann-Shack wavefront
      sensor based on 4F system. Optik (Stuttg). 126, 1303–1306 (2015).

221. Knöpfel, T. & Song, C. Optical voltage imaging in neurons: moving from technology
      development to practical tool. Nature Reviews Neuroscience vol. 20 719–727 (2019).

222. Lecoq, J., Orlova, N. & Grewe, B. F. Wide. Fast. Deep: Recent Advances in
      Multiphoton Microscopy of In Vivo Neuronal Activity. J. Neurosci. 39, 9042–9052
      (2019).




                                             161
