                   Social information and collective action
                                           Agnalys Michaud



      To cite this version:
    Agnalys Michaud. Social information and collective action. Economics and Finance. Université
    Montpellier, 2020. English. �NNT : 2020MONTD039�. �tel-03437282�




                                   HAL Id: tel-03437282
                 https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-03437282
                                      Submitted on 19 Nov 2021




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access               L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-     destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
entific research documents, whether they are pub-     scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
lished or not. The documents may come from            émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
teaching and research institutions in France or       recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
abroad, or from public or private research centers.   publics ou privés.


         THÈSE POUR OBTENIR LE GRADE DE DOCTEUR
             DE L’UNIVERSITE DE MONTPELLIER

                                    En ÉCONOMIE

                  École Doctorale Économie et Gestion de Montpellier
                         Portée par l’Université de Montpellier

                              Unité de recherche CEEM




            Social In formation and co llective action




               Présentée par Agnalys MICHAUD CALDICHOURY
                               Le 11/12/2020

                      Sous la direction de Pr. Marc WILLINGER
                      et la co-direction de Dr. Stefano FAROLFI

                            Devant le jury composé de

Giuseppe ATTANASI, Professeur, Université Côte d’Azur                  Rapporteur
François COCHARD, Professeur, Université Bourgogne Franche Comté       Examinateur
Emmanuelle LAVAINE, Maître de conférence, Université de Montpellier    Examinateur
Angela SUTAN, Professeur, Burgundy School of Business                  Rapporteur
Stefano FAROLFI, Directeur de recherche, CIRAD                         Co-directeur
Marc WILLINGER, Professeur, Université de Montpellier                  Directeur




Social Information and collective action


             Agnalys Michaud


              22 octobre 2020




                                             Abstract


Little is known about the effect of social information on the ability of groups to overcome a
collective action problem. By social information, we mean information about the actions of other
group members and their effects. This thesis aims to shed new light on this subject. In the first
chapter, we analyze the effect of different levels of information regarding subjects’ actions, and
different ways to deliver it, on the extraction of a common pool resource. In the second and third
chapters, we analyze the effect of presenting the actions of other group members as generating
positive or negative externalities on the group’s ability to produce a public good. In these
chapters, we replicate the frame of the voluntary contribution mechanism created by Andreoni
(1995); and add peer pressure (Masclet et al., 2003) or peer punishment (Fehr & Gachter, 2000).
Besides, throughout this thesis, we pay particular attention to how social information influences
subjects’ cooperation and still the way they react to the social information delivered. As a result,
the taste for conformity is an important driver of group dynamics. Furthermore, the perception
subjects have of others’ actions can hinder their ability to converge on a high rate of contribution.
We also observe different reactions to the information delivered depending on the subjects’ social
orientation (Murphy et al., 2011). The more individualistic tend to imitate the worst behaviors
when they are displayed and seem more sensitive to the framing effect. These results invite us to
take better account of social preferences in order to understand the effects of the dissemination
of social information and, in particular, the impact of different feedback on the management of
natural resources.

   Keywords: cooperation, social information, common pool resource, public good, framing,
peer pressure, peer punishment




                                                  i


                                             Résumé


Nous avons à ce jour peu de connaissances quant à l’effet de l’information sociale sur la capacité
des groupes à surmonter un problème d’action collective. Par information sociale, nous entendons
toute information qui concerne les actions des autres membres d’un groupe et leurs effets. Cette
thèse vise à amener de nouveaux éléments sur ce sujet. Dans le premier chapitre, nous analysons
l’effet de l’accès à différents niveaux d’information sociale et des différentes façons de la fournir
sur l’extraction d’une ressource commune. Dans les chapitres deux et trois, nous analysons la
capacité du groupe à produire un bien public selon que les actions des autres membres du groupes
soient présentées comme générant des externalités positives ou négatives. Dans ces chapitres, nous
reproduisons le framing du mécanisme de contribution volontaire créé par Andreoni (1995) ; et
ajoutons des mécanismes de pression par les pairs (Masclet et al., 2003) ou la punition (Fehr
& Gachter, 2000). Dans l’ensemble de cette thèse, nous portons une attention particulière à la
manière dont l’information sociale influence la coopération des sujets et plus encore la manière
dont ils réagissent à l’information sociale délivrée. Il en résulte que le goût du conformisme est
un moteur important de la dynamique de groupe. De plus, la perception que les sujets ont des
actions des autres est un élément qui peut entraver leur capacité à converger vers un taux de
contribution élevé. On observe également des réactions différentes à l’information délivrée selon
les orientations sociales des sujets (Murphy et al., 2011). Les plus individualistes ont tendance
à imiter les pires comportements lorsqu’ils sont affichés et semblent plus sensibles à l’effet du
framing. Ces résultats nous invitent à mieux prendre en compte les préférences sociales afin
de comprendre les effets de la diffusion d’informations sociales et, en particulier, l’impact des
différents types de feedback sur la gestion des ressources naturelles.

    Mots clés : coopération, information sociale, ressource commune, bien public, framing, pres-
sion par les pairs, punition par les pairs




                                                 ii


                                            Remerciements | Acknowledgments




    Je me dois de remercier mes directeurs de thèse M. Farolfi, pour m’avoir donné la possibilité de
poursuivre ma formation en effectuant cette thèse ; et M. Willinger pour m’avoir donné les moyens
et offert un environnement permettant de faire de la recherche. Merci de vous être impliqué de
façon à ce que je puisse effectuer des expériences de laboratoire, collaborer avec David Masclet
et Kate Farrow, et rencontrer de nombreuses chercheur.e.s au cours des séminaires et colloques ;
ces expériences ont été extrêmement enrichissantes. Merci enfin d’avoir accepté de diriger cette
thèse.

   Je tiens également à remercier les membres du jury, M. Attanasi, M. Cochard, Mme. Lavaine
et Mme. Sutan pour avoir accepté de constituer ce dernier.

    Merci également à ceux qui m’ont accompagné tout au long de ce processus. Dans ce cadre,
je tiens à remercier Mme. Rosaz pour ses conseils avisés tout au long de ces années. Merci
également à mes collègues de G-eau ainsi que de l’Université, pour ces discussions toujours
enrichissantes : Selda, Hind, Sarah, Claire D., Kevin D, Alexandre, Romain, Serge, Bilal, Jimmy,
Ismael, Mohammed. J’ai une pensée toute particulière pour ceux qui ont vécu au plus près les
différentes phases de ce parcours Claire R., Marine, Bruno et David. N.

    Je tiens à remercier mes proches, mes parents et tout particulièrement ma grand-mère pour
leurs indéfectibles soutiens. A Félix pour tout ce que l’on ne dit pas ici, merci.




                                                 iii


iv


                                                            Table of contents




General introduction                                                               1


1 The effect of social information and voluntary display of individual extractions
  in a common pool resource context                                                11


Appendices of chapter 1                                                           41


2 Introduction of chapters 2 and 3                                                59


Appendices of the Introduction of chapters 2 and 3                                73


3 Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing                         85


Appendices of chapter 2                                                          115


4 Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing                      161


Appendices of chapter 3                                                          193


5 Discussion of chapters 2 and 3                                                 239


Appendices of the discussion of chapters 2 and 3                                 255




                                         v


General conclusion            259


Traduction en français        271




                         vi


                                                                     General introduction




    Most natural resources are overexploited and require collective action to be governed. Howe-
ver, how to promote and maintain collective action is one of the most debated issues. Whether
for the provision of a public good or for the management of a common resource, when individual
interests conflict with the collective interest, cooperation is difficult to achieve. The individual has
an incentive not to bear the cost of the contribution, or to extract as much as possible, whereas
the interest of the group is to regulate behavior in order to provide and maintain the resource.
As a consequence, it theoretically leads to under-provision of public goods (Olson, 2009), and
over-exploitation of common pool resources also known as the tragedy of the commons (Hardin,
1968).

    Contradicting these conclusions, in her seminal work, Ostrom (1990) demonstrated that local
groups are able to sustainably manage the common pool without a strict definition of ownership
or state control. Based on this work, she identifies eight governance principles that enable to
avoid the tragedy of the commons : (i) a clear definition of group boundaries, (ii) a proportional
distribution of costs and benefits, (iii) arrangements established on a collective basis, (iv) the
establishment of a monitoring and control system, (v) the establishment of graduated sanctions,
(vi) the existence of a low price dispute resolution mechanism, (vii) the recognition of the right
to organize, (viii) the application of these rules on multiple scales (nested enterprises). Going
further in investigations about how behavioral aspects might explain why groups succeed or fail
to cooperate, Ostrom remains a pioneer to use experimental economics to study these aspects.
As a result of this work, she demonstrates that mechanisms, which should not impact group
dynamics, such as communication (cheap talk), enable groups to generate and maintain coope-
ration (Ostrom et al., 1994). In line with this work, advances in behavioral and experimental
economics reveal that other mechanisms were also effective to generate and maintain cooperation,
such as : monetary sanctions (Fehr and Gächter, 2000), symbolic sanctions (Masclet et al., 2003)
and rewards (Sefton et al., 2007). Those mechanisms are based on the expression of approval or
disapproval of others’ actions and should not impact behavior if we have a narrow interpretation
of human economic interest. Nevertheless, they are present in most groups.

     Continuing Ostrom’s work, Dietz et al. (2003) considers that to achieve efficient governance,
it is necessary that, among other things, i) information about resources and users’ actions are
available at a low price ; and ii) communities maintain frequent communication and dense social
network (social capital). The question of the effect of these dimensions on the effective capacity


                                                   1


                                       General introduction




of communities to maintain a resource is very topical and of primary importance. Institutions
involved in resource management are gradually putting in place systems that provide information
on users’ actions and the state of resources in order to facilitate their governance.

    For example, in terms of water management, the "Compagnie d’Aménagement des Coteaux
de Gascogne (CACG)", which is an organization that delivers water to farmers, has set up a
connected system that was initially designed to identify better the actual consumption of their
users (and their schedule) and thus optimize their management. Indeed, within the framework
of the "Loi sur l’eau” of 2006 and the decree of August 2007, the CACG must ensure that
the commitments to achieve a good state of the environment are respected. As such, it must
ensure that a minimum flow (“Débit Objectif d’Etiage”= Low Flow Objective and a fortiori a
“Débit de Crise” =Crisis Flow) is maintained in the environments impacted by withdrawals
dedicated to irrigation. The installation of tele-connected meters makes it possible to obtain
more precise (daily) information concerning the needs (real withdrawals) of farmers and their
temporalities. This information enables the company to optimize the timing of releases from the
water reservoirs under its management. Indeed, when releases do not correspond to needs, the
water supplied is not used by farmers and therefore not invoiced. Moreover, this unused water
risks generating a shortage at the end of the crop year. Here the system’s initial function is to
facilitate coordination between the actions of the manager and the farmers. The implementation
and acceptance of this system were strongly influenced by the different levels of pressure on the
resource. It is an instrument contributing to the creation of a new relationship between water and
society (Burger-Leenhardt et al., 2018 ; Collard et al., 2019). As such, it has also been used to
disseminate social information, displaying the average rate of water consumption (Chabe-Ferret
et al., 2019).

    Another example is the setting up of an information platform called "Système d’Information
sur l’Eau du Marais Poitevin" (SIEMP) by the "Etablissement public de l’eau et de la biodi-
versité sur le Marais Poitevin" (EPMP). The EPMP is a public institution whose mission is
to coordinate the management of the geographical area called Marais Poitevin. It was created
after the condemnation France’s condemnation due to the degradation of the environment in
1999 (non-respect of the birds directive). This degradation was generated by the consequent
development of irrigation in this zone, which is now identified as having a high tension on the
water resource (Zones de Répartition des Eaux (ZRE)). This zone is characterized by a substan-
tial diversity in the actors involved in the management of the environment (nature protection
associations, fishermen, marshland syndicate associations, State services, local authorities, etc.).
The SIEMP information system provides information on the state of the resource but also on
current collective extraction by farmers to all stakeholders concerned ; it is divided into two parts.
The first part is dedicated to the general public and provides information about the state of the
resources. It aims to provide a better understanding of the functioning of "Marais Poitevin" and
thus to build trust and facilitate dialogue between the wide range of stakeholder involved. The
second part is devoted to the actors involved in establishing the management rules. This second
system allows them to monitor the actual extractions levels of the group of farmers.

    Many issues emerge from the implementation of this kind of information systems. Will the
fact to deliver information about other users’ actions facilitate the management of a resource ?
Numerous questions arise about the form, level of detail and manner in which this information has
to be provided and its effects. How will the individual use this information ? Can this information
change their behaviors ? In other words, can this information favor the emergence of a cooperation
norm, or on the contrary make it more difficult ? Moreover, what can be the influence of subjects’
perception of the effect of others’ actions on the group’s ability to cooperate ? This questioning


                                                  2


                                       General introduction




stems from Andreoni (1995b)’s results, emphasizing that subjects are more willing to cooperate
when they perceive others’ actions as having positive effects than when they perceive them as
having negative ones. Finally, to what extent can this perception, created by the information
provided in the Andreoni (1995b) frame, interact with the group’s ability to cooperate ?

    This thesis aims to bring new insights concerning the effects of providing information about
users’ actions on the management of natural resources, illustrating them by common pool and
public good contexts. We more particularly concentrate our study on the effect of the information
about peers’ actions and their potential effects on group dynamics. We first analyze the effect
of displaying social information under different modalities on group dynamics in a common pool
context. This experiment composes the first chapter of this thesis. In the second part, we examine
the effect of the perception that subjects have of the actions of others on group dynamics by
presenting their peers’ actions as having potential positive or negative externalities. In this part,
we analyze how the framing effect interacts with mechanisms aimed at fostering cooperation
such as peer pressure and peer punishment. The effect of the frame interaction with those two
mechanisms composes respectively our chapter 2 and 3. Moreover, through all the thesis, we try
to analyze how social preferences impact subjects’ sensitivity to social information. The questions
raised by these three aspects will be presented with more detail in the following paragraphs.



Social information

    We consider that non-excludability and rivalry are at the source of most of the problems
related to the management of natural resources. As a consequence, we choose, in our first chapter,
a game that represents a Common Pool Resource. We adopt, for our analysis, the protocol
established by Herr et al. (1997) that represents groundwater management. This chapter is
devoted to the analysis of the effect of social information on the group’s cooperation. More
specifically, the effect of displaying individuals’ actions on the group dynamic is observed.

    In her behavioral framework, Ostrom (1998) states that delivering information about other
group members actions’ is necessary to establish trust and build a reputation, which she considers
being determinants for group cooperation success. However, there are many field works, finding
that delivering information about other users’ actions, far from generating an increase of coope-
ration, induces a convergence of behaviors toward the average behavior displayed (Schultz, 1999 ;
Schultz et al., 2007 ; Croson & Shang, 2008 ; Ferraro & Price, 2013). Experimental works also de-
monstrate that displaying individuals actions, or individual payoffs (complete information), can
worsen collective action, as subjects are more tempted to imitate the most competitive behavior
displayed (Carpenter, 2004 ; Offerman et al., 2002 ; Villena & Zecchetto, 2011 ; Bigoni & Suetens,
2012).

    In order to shed light on the question of the effect of social information on CPR management,
and more precisely about the effect of displaying individuals’ actions, we compare treatments in
which only the group aggregated extraction is displayed with a treatment in which individual
extractions are displayed. Besides, we also analyze the effect of different modalities in the way of
providing social information. Kreitmair (2015) argues that the voluntary dimension of the infor-
mation disclosure can play an important role in the willingness to cooperate. In her experiment
on public good’s contribution, she proposes a mechanism that enables subjects to signal their
willingness to make their own action public before they make their choices. We are testing the
effect of the same mechanism in a CPR context. Moreover, as Chaudhuri and Paichayontvijit


                                                 3


                                       General introduction




(2006) experiment shows, subjects contribute more when they get informed that a majority of
subjects in their group are willing to do so. We, therefore decided to add a majority dimension in
this information disclosure mechanism. Through these treatments, we are testing if the voluntary
dimension enables subjects to signal their willingness to cooperate. These treatments allow us to
provide results about how the willingness to display subjects’ extraction is linked to a willingness
to cooperate in reducing their extractions. In other words, these results allow us to understand
better whether the voluntary dimension is used as a signal of willingness to cooperate. Also, this
work allows us to understand better the effect of having a majority of subjects declaring their
willingness to make their actions public on the group’s ability to cooperate.

     Finally, we analyze the impact of providing social information by disclosing the actions of
individuals on group dynamics. More precisely, we examine if the fact to provide aggregated or
individual information impacts the extraction strategies. To do so, we use the learning analysis as
defined in Huck et al. (1999), that determines which strategies better explain contributions change
from period to period. To establish the different strategies of extraction, we adapt those defined
in Villena and Zecchetto (2011), which is the first article that considers the effect of learning in
a common pool resource context. Chapter 1 provides insights to understand the drivers of group
dynamics and how the level of aggregation concerning social information discloses can impact
it. In other words, we are providing new results to understand how subjects might modify their
extractions strategies depending on the kind of information available concerning others’ actions.

   In the remainder of the thesis, we analyze another dimension of the effects of social infor-
mation provision. We examine how the information provided to describe collective action issues
and the effects of peer actions have an impact on group cooperation and the effectiveness of the
mechanisms that are identified as promoting cooperation.



Presenting others’actions as having positive vs negative externali-
ties and disapproval ratings

    Numerous experiments demonstrate that the way to present a collective action issue strongly
influences group cooperation (Andreoni, 1995b ; Cox, 2015 ; Cubitt et al., 2011a ; Cubitt et al.,
2011b ; Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ; Fosgaard et al., 2014 ; Fujimoto and Park, 2010 ; Messer et
al. ,2007 ; Messer et al., 2013 ; Gächter et al., 2017). In most cases, subjects are more willing
to contribute when the social interaction is described as having potential positive externalities
rather than negative ones. In his experiment, Andreoni (1995b) demonstrates that subjects are
more willing to cooperate when they perceive that they are doing good than doing bad onto
others. He concludes that the warm glow effect is more efficient in promoting cooperation than
the cold prickle effect. We analyze if this perception might interact with mechanisms that are
present in most of the groups and that have proved their efficiency in fostering cooperation : peer
pressure and peer punishment.

    By peer disapproval, we mean a mechanism that allows subjects to express dissatisfac-
tion/disagreement with the actions of other individuals in their groups (their peers). Peer pu-
nishment (Fehr and Gächter, 2000 ; Ostrom et al., 1994) and peer pressure (Masclet et al., 2003)
demonstrated their efficiency to promote and maintain cooperation. Considering that individuals
are strictly selfish, they should not bear the cost of sending monetary sanctions and should nei-
ther change their behavior when receiving other’s symbolic disapproval. However, experimental
evidence demonstrates that when these mechanisms are introduced, the majority act in a coope-

                                                 4


                                       General introduction




rative manner, whereas this is not the case when they are absent. Fehr and Fischbacher (2004)
argue that sanctions enable the activation of a social norm of cooperation. Nevertheless, Messer
et al. (2013)’s experiment shows that mechanisms such as communication and other cheap talk
mechanisms were less efficient under a frame that highlights the negative externalities of social
interactions. In chapters 2 and 3, we examine whether the effectiveness of disapproval ratings
and the common norm of cooperation they activate could be affected by the frame.

    To do so, we strictly replicate the frames of the voluntary contribution experiment created
by Andreoni (1995b). We thus distinguish between a positive frame that highlights the poten-
tial positive externality of social interaction and a negative frame that highlights the potential
negative externality of the latter. For these two frames, we add the possibility to send symbolic
sanctions in chapter 2 and monetary ones in chapter 3 (in between conditions). We also control
the order effect of these disapproval ratings by introducing them in the first sequence or the
second sequence depending on the treatment.

    Those two chapters provide new results concerning Andreoni(1995)’s framing effect on groups’
contribution. Moreover, we provide new insights into the robustness of disapproval ratings to
contextual changes. Our work provides a better understanding of how highlighting the potential
positive vs negative externalities of social interaction impacts the willingness to disapprove, the
reaction to disapproval and as a consequence the capacity of the group to define a contribution
norm. We also provide new results that are consistent with what is identified as the main effects
of framing, namely the perception, or misperception and the willingness to reciprocate.

    Finally, through all this thesis, we analyze how subjects’ social preference might affect their
response to social information.



Social preferences

    While strategical understanding and confusion are essential explanations for group coope-
ration, Andreoni (1995a) also invites us to consider social preferences as important drivers for
group dynamics. In this thesis, we firstly analyze how social preferences influence cooperation in
both common pool resources and public goods. To do so, in all the experiments presented, we
measure the subjects’ social value orientation using Murphy et al. (2011) method. Thanks to this
test, we obtain an individual social value orientation score that reflects the subjects’ preference
for equal sharing. Besides, we analyze how this score influence cooperative behavior.

    Moreover, in both public good and CPR contexts, we shed light on how social preferences
interact with social information. More specifically, we analyze how social preferences may interact
with the reaction to the disclosure of information about the actions of others. Next, we analyze
how social preferences interact with the way the issue of collective action is presented (positively
or negatively). In other words, does the social orientation of the subjects influence the way they
react to the presentation of collective action ? In this replica of Andreoni(1995b)’s frame, the
economic incentives remain strictly identical.

    In the first chapter, we develop a theoretical framework to identify how social preferences such
as altruism (Levine, 1997), reciprocity (Sugden, 1984), aversion to inequality (Fehr & Schmidt,
1999) or a taste for conformity (Luzzati, 1999) can influence how individuals react to the dis-
closure of others’ actions. At the same time, we conduct a learning analysis to identify how


                                                 5


                                      General introduction




individuals actually modify their strategies based on the available information. Moreover, like
Bigoni and Suetens (2012), we go further in this analysis of learning by distinguishing between
different types of subjects. The main difference is that we use the categories defined by Murphy’s
test to establish types. This analysis allows us to provide new evidence on how social preferences
influence how subjects respond to information about the actions of others.

    In chapter 2 and 3, we analyze how social preferences influence the willingness to recipro-
cate depending on the frame. Indeed, Park (2000) finds that social value orientations strongly
influence the way subjects react to the frame. The global analysis of chapters 2 and 3 provides
results regarding how social orientation impacts subjects’ sensitivity to a frame that highlight
the potential positive vs negative externalities of social interactions. Moreover, we provide new
results that increase our understanding of how those social preferences influence their stated
willingness to reciprocate depending on the frame.

    Lastly, Fehr and Schmidt (1999) demonstrate that, when material sanctions are applied, the
full contribution to the public good can be an equilibrium. We provide results that show it can
be affected by the frame. In other words, chapter 3 provides results to understand better how the
frame could affect group capacity to converge towards full contribution when material sanctions
are applied. To better understand these results, we analyze how subjects react to sanctions
introduction, changing their extractions strategies, distinguishing subjects depending on their
social orientation value.

    To sum up, this thesis contributes to the literature on the impact of social information on
group dynamics in the face of social dilemmas. In the first part, we analyze the effects of social
information diffusion on extraction in the context of a common pool resource. In the second part,
we analyze the effects of a framing highlighting respectively, the positive or negative effects of
peer actions on the contribution to a public good. For each of these two parts, we pay particular
attention to how social preferences influence on the one hand the willingness to cooperate and
on the other hand the reaction to information about peer actions and their effects.




                                                6


                                    General introduction




References

   ANDREONI, J. 1995a. Cooperation in Public-Goods Experiments : Kindness or Confusion ?
The American Economic Review, 85, 891-904.

   ANDREONI, J. 1995b. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : the effects of positive and negative
framing on cooperation in experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1-21.

   BIGONI, M. & SUETENS, S. 2012. Feedback and dynamics in public good experiments.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 82, 86-95.

   CARPENTER, J. P. 2004. When in Rome : conformity and the provision of public goods.
The Journal of Socio-Economics, 33, 395-408.

    CHABE-FERRET, Sylvain, LE COENT, Philippe, REYNAUD, Arnaud, et al. Can we nudge
farmers into saving water ? Evidence from a randomised experiment. European Review of Agri-
cultural Economics, 2019, vol. 46, no 3, p. 393-416.

   CHAUDHURI, A. & PAICHAYONTVIJIT, T. 2006. Conditional cooperation and voluntary
contributions to a public good. Economics Bulletin, 3, 1-14.

   COX, C. A. 2015. Decomposing the effects of negative framing in linear public goods games.
Economics Letters, 126, 63-65.

   CROSON, R. & SHANG, J. Y. 2008. The impact of downward social information on contri-
bution decisions. Experimental Economics, 11, 221-233.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M. & GÄCHTER, S. 2011a. Framing and free riding : emo-
tional responses and punishment in social dilemma games. Experimental Economics, 14, 254-272.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M., GÄCHTER, S. & KABALIN, R. 2011b. Moral judgments
in social dilemmas : How bad is free riding ? Journal of Public Economics, 95, 253-264.

    DIETZ, T., OSTROM, E. & STERN, P. C. 2003. The struggle to govern the commons.
science, 302, 1907-1912.

   DUFWENBERG, M., GÄCHTER, S. & HENNIG-SCHMIDT, H. 2011. The framing of games
and the psychology of play. Games and Economic Behavior, 73, 459-478.

   FEHR, E. & FISCHBACHER, U. 2004. Social norms and human cooperation. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 8, 185-190.

   FEHR, E. & GÄCHTER, S. 2000. Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Experi-
ments. The American Economic Review, 90, 980-994.

   FEHR, E. & SCHMIDT, K. M. 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
Quarterly journal of Economics, 817-868.

    FERRARO, P. J. & PRICE, M. K. 2013. Using nonpecuniary strategies to influence behavior :
evidence from a large-scale field experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 64-73.

                                             7


                                     General introduction




    FOSGAARD, T. R., HANSEN, L. G. & WENGSTRÖM, E. 2014. Understanding the nature
of cooperation variability. Journal of Public Economics, 120, 134-143.

   FUJIMOTO, H. & PARK, E.-S. 2010. Framing effects and gender differences in voluntary
public goods provision experiments. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 39, 455-457.

    GÄCHTER, S., KOELLE, F. & QUERCIA, S. 2017. Reciprocity and the tragedies of main-
taining and providing the commons Nature Human Behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9),
650-656.

   HARDIN, G. 1968. The tragedy of the commons. science, 162, 1243-1248.

    HERR, A., GARDNER, R. & WALKER, J. M. 1997. An experimental study of time-
independent and time-dependent externalities in the commons. Games and Economic Behavior,
19, 77-96.

   HUCK, S., NORMANN, H.-T. & OECHSSLER, J. 1999. Learning in Cournot Oligopoly –
an Experiment. The Economic Journal, 109, 80-95.

   KREITMAIR, U. 2015. Voluntary disclosure of contributions : an experimental study on
nonmandatory approaches for improving public good provision. Ecology and Society, 20.

    LEVINE, D. K. 1997. Modeling altruism and spitefulness in experiments, unpublished. De-
partment of Economics, UCLA.

   LUZZATI, T. 1999. Economic theory and conformism (Vol. 68). Edward Elgar Publishing,
Cheltenham Glos, UK.

   MASCLET, D., NOUSSAIR, C., TUCKER, S. & VILLEVAL, M.-C. 2003. Monetary and
nonmonetary punishment in the voluntary contributions mechanism. The American Economic
Review, 93, 366-380.

    MESSER, K. D., SUTER, J. F. & YAN, J. 2013. Context effects in a negatively framed social
dilemma experiment. Environmental and Resource Economics, 55, 387-405.

    MESSER, K. D., ZARGHAMEE, H., KAISER, H. M. & SCHULZE, W. D. 2007. New hope
for the voluntary contributions mechanism : The effects of context. Journal of Public Economics,
91, 1783-1799.

    MURPHY, R. O., ACKERMANN, K. A. & HANDGRAAF, M. 2011. Measuring social value
orientation. Judgment and Decision Making, 6, 771-781.

    OFFERMAN, T., POTTERS, J. & SONNEMANS, J. 2002. Imitation and Belief Learning
in an Oligopoly Experiment. The Review of Economic Studies, 69, 973-997.

   OLSON, M. 2009. The Logic of Collective Action : Public Goods and the Theory of Groups,
Second Printing with a New Preface and Appendix, Harvard University Press.

    OSTROM, E. 1990. Governing the commons : The evolution of institutions for collective
action, Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.


                                               8


                                     General introduction




    OSTROM, E. 1998. A behavioral approach to the rational choice theory of collective action :
Presidential address, American Political Science Association, 1997. American political science
review, 92, 1-22.

   OSTROM, E., GARDNER, R. & WALKER, J. 1994. Rules, games, and common-pool re-
sources, University of Michigan Press.

    PARK, E.-S. 2000. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : a further experimental study of framing
effects on free-riding. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 43, 405-421.

   SCHULTZ, P. W. 1999. Changing behavior with normative feedback interventions : A field
experiment on curbside recycling. Basic and applied social psychology, 21, 25-36.

    SCHULTZ, P. W., NOLAN, J. M., CIALDINI, R. B., GOLDSTEIN, N. J. & GRISKEVI-
CIUS, V. 2007. The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psycho-
logical science, 18, 429-434.

   SEFTON, M., SHUPP, R. & WALKER, J. M. 2007. The effect of rewards and sanctions in
provision of public goods. Economic inquiry, 45, 671-690.

   SUGDEN, R. 1984. Reciprocity : the supply of public goods through voluntary contributions.
The Economic Journal, 94, 772-787.

    VILLENA, M. G. & ZECCHETTO, F. 2011. Subject-specific performance information can
worsen the tragedy of the commons : Experimental evidence. Journal of Economic Psychology,
32, 330-347.




                                              9


General introduction




        10


            The effect of social information and voluntary display of
                                                                                              1
          individual extractions in a common pool resource context


This chapter is based on joint work with Dimitri Dubois and Stefano Farolfi. We would
like to thank Marc Willinger and Marielle Montginoul for their active collaboration in the
development of the protocol.




                                            Abstract


The management of a natural resource, more particularly a water resource, often refers to a
problem of managing a common pool resource. In this context, Ostrom (1998) and Dietz et al.
(2003) highlight the importance of disseminating information on the actions of co-users in order
to facilitate its governance. However, several experiments show that, far from facilitating coopera-
tion, the disclosure of social information can induce convergence towards average behavior which
can accelerate resource predation. In this experiment, we seek to determine the effect of social
information disclosure on the extraction of a common resource. We reproduce the experiment of
Walker et al. (2000), and we test the effects of different levels of social information, i.e. infor-
mation about co-users’ actions, (aggregated, individual) and different mechanisms for sharing it
(compulsory, voluntary, or based on a majority vote) (Kreitmair, 2015). To determine if and how
social preferences can induce different effects of social information disclosure on extraction dy-
namics, we produce on the one hand a theoretical framework, and on the other hand, we analyze
what the actual extraction changes are by mobilizing learning analyses as described by Huck et
al. (1999) and Bigoni and Suetens (2012). When we consider group extraction, it appears that
the different treatments do not improve the management of the resource. All groups result in a
level of extractions close to Nash’s equilibrium. The theoretical framework provides an element
of explanation ; when subjects have preferences for reciprocity or compliance, social information
may induce an increase of extractions. Learning models confirm this result ; the taste for confor-
mity as well as an individualistic best response are important drivers of the extraction dynamics.
Moreover, subjects with an individualistic or a competitive social orientation tend to imitate the
most extractive behaviors when displayed. These findings tend to support the assumption that
the dissemination of social information can aggravate the tragedy of the commons.

   Keywords : common pool resource, social information, feedback, voluntary sharing


                                                11


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




1.1    Introduction

     Natural resource management, and more particularly water resource management, often refer
to a common pool dilemma. Users cannot be excluded but compete in the resource appropriation.
As a consequence, there is a social dilemma, the individual interest being in contradiction with
the collective one. Hardin (1968) advocates that without a clear definition of good’s boundaries
and control by the State, this dilemma will lead to an overexploitation of the resource, which the
author called the tragedy of the commons. Criticizing this conclusion, Ostrom (1990) identified in
her seminal work eight governance principles that would enable to avoid it. Continuing this work,
Dietz et al. (2003) argue that delivering liable information about : (i) the State of the resource,
(ii) the users’ actions, and (iii) the uncertainties, is determinant for governance efficiency. In
this work, we do concentrate on the effects of disclosing information about users’ actions on
extraction. In other words, we analyze the effects of disclosing information about the user’s
actions on the extraction behaviors.

    There is no clear statement about the potential effect of disclosing social information, which
refers to information about other users’ actions in a collective action issue. In her behavorial
framework, Ostrom (1998) defends the idea that delivering information about other users’ actions
is determinant to build reputation and trust, which both strongly influence the group capacity
to cooperate. This argument may let us think that making all users’ actions public could have
strong and positive effects on group cooperation. Empirical evidence suggests that providing
social information strongly influences behaviors in a wide range of situations, such as water
consumption (Ferraro & Price, 2013), curbside recycling (Schultz, 1999), energy consumption
(Schultz et al., 2007) and even donations to a radio (Croson & Shang, 2008). In most of these
cases, there is a convergence towards the average observed actions. This fact seems to imply
that the most predator behaviors tend to decrease their consumptions, but also that the most
virtuous ones tend to increase it. As a consequence, public information about private decisions can
worsen the outcome of social interactions, compared to a situation where individuals’ decisions
remain private. This effect is called the "Boomerang effect" (Schultz et al., 2007). Delivering
information about subjects’ realized actions seems, therefore, to strongly affect behaviors. In
some cases, convergence to the average may be desirable as it provides an improvement of the
group welfare. However, in other contexts, it may have the opposite effect, i.e. degradation of the
group welfare.

    In light of these findings, the experiment of Kreitmair (2015) seems to bring interesting
lines of thought. In her public good experiment, Kreitmair shows that a mechanism based on
subjects’ willingness to display their actions can increase group cooperation. Indeed, she finds
that contributions are significantly higher when subjects choose voluntarily to disclose them in
contrast to situations where the display of their actions is compulsory. In the voluntary display
treatment, subjects declare if they want to disclose their actions, and they get informed about
the total number of subjects who are willing to do so in their group before each group member
decides about their contribution. This voluntary dimension calls for more attention since the
cost of getting information about real actions can be high. However, thanks to the development
of new technologies, we can imagine that the voluntary disclosure can be an affordable solution.
Indeed, the user will be able to easily disclose his extraction level, for instance through the use
of smartphones, which will induce a much lower cost than the control procedure to obtain it.

    The aim of this work, based on experimental economics, is to increase our knowledge about
how social information can impact cooperation in a CPR context, more specifically in groundwa-
ter management. Our research question is : "Does the fact of disclosing social information affect

                                                12


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




CPR extraction ?". We have then two subquestions : i) Can social information, more precisely
the fact of disclosing all subjects’ actions, worsen the tragedy of the commons ? ii) Is the volun-
tary disclosure of extraction a mechanism that can promote and maintain cooperation in CPR
management ?

    To answer these questions, we built an experimental protocol based on four information
treatments, 1) No disclosure, in which individuals receive only the aggregate information of
group extraction, 2) Compulsory disclosure, in which individuals receive information on every
group member’s extraction, 3) Individual disclosure, in which only the extraction of subjects who
are willing to do so is disclosed ; 4) Majority disclosure, in which the disclosure of all subjects’
extractions in a group depends on the will of the majority. To sum up, the treatments differ
depending on the level of extraction disclosed (individual or aggregate) and the mechanism used
for disclosure : compulsory or based on voluntary mechanisms (individual, majority vote).

    The effect of providing aggregated or individual information about the subject’s actions on
the collective dynamics of the group is unclear. In a public context, Weimann (1994) ’s expe-
riment shows that there is no effect, whereas Carpenter (2004) ’s experiment demonstrates a
quicker decrease of the public good provision due to an imitation of the worst behaviors dis-
played. Carpenter (2004) explains his result by a taste of conformity which worsens the group
dynamic when individual information is displayed. These results are consistent with those obtai-
ned in CPR experiments in which the subjects’ actions are made public (Janssen, 2013 ; Janssen
et al., 2014), or in which complete information is provided (Villena & Zecchetto, 2011) that ob-
serve a quicker depletion of the resource. In these experiments, subjects tend to adopt the most
predatory behavior when they observe others’ behavior. Based on this evidence, we assume that
the Compulsory disclosure will worsen the tragedy of the commons, making it quicker compared
to a situation in which subjects have information about the aggregate extraction. Considering
the voluntary dimension, we assume that, like communication (Falk et al., 2002), it will allow
subjects to express their willingness to cooperate and therefore, to declare their types. It is the
reason why we consider that in the treatment with a voluntary display mechanism, subjects who
express a desire to display their actions will have significantly lower extractions than others.
Also, following the results of Chaudhuri et al. (2006) showing that cooperation increases when
subjects are informed that a majority of subjects are willing to cooperate if others do so, we
make the following hypothesis : if the group is informed that a majority of subjects are willing to
display their extraction, and that is a credible signal of the willingness to cooperate, extractions
should be lower.

    In this experiment, we are paying attention to social preferences ; more precisely how they
may affect the willingness to display extraction and reaction to the social information displayed.
To do so, we firstly analyze how this information, theoretically affects the best response through
different patterns of social preferences such as altruism (Levine, 1997), reciprocity (Sugden, 1984),
inequality aversion (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999) or conformity (Luzzati, 1999). In the second part, we
analyze how the information provided is actually used by the subjects to modify their extractions.
To do this, we use a learning analysis model that is based on different assumptions about how
subjects use the information provided to modify their extractions. To formulate our learning
hypotheses, we adapt those of Villena and Zecchetto (2011) and for the analysis we adopt the
one provided by Huck et al (1999) and reproduced by Bigoni and Suetens (2012). Finally, we
distinguish our learning analysis by subject type to determine whether social preferences have
an impact on the use of social information displayed.

   Our results show that disclosing information about individual extractions does not affect


                                                 13


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




the extraction dynamics. The trend of extraction increase is similar in each treatments. The
voluntary mechanism does not foster collective action in the CPR context. Indeed, even if the
willingness to display extraction is correlated with lower extraction levels, especially in the first
period after the introduction of the mechanism, over the game, extractions keep on increasing. It
leads us to say that the voluntary disclosure mechanism is used as a signal of the willingness to
cooperate, but it is not sufficient to generate and maintain cooperation. Since most groups obtain
a majority in favor of displaying extractions, its ineffectiveness cannot be explained by a weak
willingness to display extractions. The theoretical framework shows that individuals with an
altruistic preference should have lower extraction. In contrast, when individuals have preferences
for reciprocity and conformity, providing information about the extraction of other subjects
may increase collective extraction. These theoretical predictions are consistent with our learning
analysis. Group’s extraction dynamics are mostly driven by convergence towards the observed
"average contribution" and also the "self-interested best reply". Moreover, when individuals’
information is displayed (i.e. in the Compulsory treatment), subjects with an individualistic or
competitive social orientation tend to imitate the average displayed extraction less and to imitate
the highest extraction. This result lends credence to the conjecture that disclosing individual
information can worsen collective dynamics. These results call on us to take into account social
preferences, such as reciprocity and conformity, to better understand the dynamics of collective
action.

    The rest of the chapter proceeds as follows ; section 2 presents the common pool game, section
3, the experimental design. Section 4 exposes the behavioral hypothesis. Results are presented
in section 5, and we discuss them in section 6.



1.2     The CPR model

    We rely on the CPR game presented in Walker et al. (2000) and Herr et al. (1997). This
protocol reproduces a groundwater’s functioning. In this game, a group of players exploit a CPR
by implementing individual extraction choices. Subjects are assigned since the beginning to
partner groups of n = 5 players, during ten periods times two sequences. The number of periods
in each sequence is announced since the beginning of the game and is common knowledge. As
the game was repeated a finite number of times, we can restrict the theoretical description to
the constituent game.

    Each period, player i has to choose the amount (xi ∈ {0; 30}) he/she extracts from the CPR.
This amount generates a benefit (Bi (xi )), representing an agricultural production function, which
is described as follows :


                                        Bi (xi ) = axi − bx2i                                   (1.1)


    It implies that the benefit received by an appropriator is independent of the extraction of other
appropriators. The parameters a and b are positive constants. Appropriators are homogeneous,
so the benefit function applies to each appropriator i.

    The rivalry aspect, characterizing common pool extraction (Apesteguia & Maier-Rigaud,
2006), is reflected in the extraction costs. Player i’ s extraction cost depends on his action but
also on the total group action (X = Σnj=1 xj ). Ci (xi , X) is the product of the amount withdrawn

                                                 14


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




by i, xi , and the average extraction cost AV C which depends on group extraction (X). It reflects
the fact that the deeper the group extract, the deeper the groundwater level, and therefore the
higher the marginal cost of extraction is. Indeed, there is a base cost of extraction c and a positive
incremental cost of c for each additional unit extracted by the group. Strategic interaction arises,
therefore, through the extraction cost.


                                                    c + cX
                                          AV C =                                                 (1.2)
                                                       2


                                   Ci (xi , X) = xi × c(X + 1)/2                                 (1.3)


    Once taking into account these two components, at the end of each period, player i’s earning
is equal to :


                             πi (xi , X) = axi − bx2i − xi × c(X + 1)/2                          (1.4)


   It is worth noticing that in this game, subjects are entirely dependent on resource extraction.
Indeed, if they choose not to extract the resource, they will get no gains. They do not have the
opportunity to get a payoff from an alternative action or activity like in the contest game.

   The unique Nash equilibrium of the extraction game is given by :
                                                   2a − c
                                        x∗i =                                                    (1.5)
                                                4b + c(n + 1)


                                            ∂πi (xi , X−i )
   This corresponds to the best response                    = 2a − c(1 + X−i ) − xi (4b + 2c) = 0 to
                                                 ∂xi
the best response, since all subjects are homogenous.
                                                                    P
                                                                ∂     Uj
   The social optimum, Pareto Optimum, is determined by                  = 0 and is equal to :
                                                                    ∂X
                                                    2a − c
                                           xPi =                                                 (1.6)
                                                   4b + 2cn


    The ratio of, the payoff generated by the extraction corresponding to the unique Nash equili-
brium and the payoff generated by the social optimum, equal to 0.60. We choose the parameters
in order to have an important difference between the payoff subjects get when they play the
unique Nash equilibrium (U (24.59) = 17, 29) and the payoff they get when all group members
have an extraction corresponding to the Pareto solution (U (15.03) = 29.04). Moreover, even if
all the gains are positive, we wanted it to be close to zero when all the members of the group
choose the maximum extraction(xmax = 30). The parameters chosen correspond to a = 3.89,
b = 0.0036 and c = 0.05.

    Another important aspect of this experiment is the level of details about costs and payoffs
given to the subjects. Even if Apesteguia (2006) defends the idea that providing detailed payoff
tables does not affect subjects’ behavior in an experimental CPR game, because they reach Nash

                                                   15


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




equilibrium in any case, we wanted to avoid as much as possible the "spite effect". Indeed, Saijo
and Nakamura (1995) demonstrate that subjects are more likely to be spiteful when they have
low details about the payoff’s structure. So in order to avoid the spite effect generated by a
poor understanding of the game’s incentives, we provide them detailed tables about the costs
and payoffs they will get depending on their extraction level (xi ) and on the extraction of others
group members (X−i ).



1.3    Experimental design

    We realize four treatments. They allow us to study two dimensions of the effect of social
information on extraction in a CPR :(i) the level of information details and (ii) the voluntary
dimension in the disclosing. We are using Between conditions. Each treatment is composed of
two successive sequences of ten periods. During the first sequence, all subjects performed the
same treatment (Baseline conditions). In sequence 2 we implemented the test treatment (details
about treatments are provided in table 1.1).

      Table 1.1 – Number of subjects per treatment in the social information experiment

  Treatment   Part 1 (periods 1 – 10)   Part 2(periods 11-20)   Subjects number [number of groups]
  T1                 Baseline                 Baseline                       55 [11]
  T2                 Baseline               Compulsory                       55 [11]
  T3                 Baseline                Individual                      60 [12]
  T4                 Baseline                 Majority                       75 [15]

   In the Baseline treatment, at the end of each period, subjects get a feedback containing
the group extraction (X = Σnj=1 xj ) and also the global extraction of the other group members
(X−i ). In the other treatments, as in Kreitmair’s experiment, they get additional information
about others’ contributions.

   In the Compulsory treatment, extractions (xj , ∀j) were automatically disclosed and made
available to all members of a group at the end of each period.

   The voluntary dimension is analyzed through two treatments.

    In the Individual disclosure treatment, we are reproducing Kreitmair’s mechanism. At
the beginning of each period, subjects individually must decide if they want to display their
extraction. Before making their extraction choices, they are informed about the number of group
members who agreed to do so in this period. At the end of each period, only the extractions level
of subjects who vote in favor are displayed.

    In the Majority disclosure treatment, subjects must also decide if they want to disclose
their extractions, and they get informed about the number of group members who are willing to
do so, before making their extractions choices. The major difference from the Individual disclose
lies in the fact that if the majority (n ≥ 3) of the group members is in favor of disclosure, all
groups members extraction will be displayed at the end of the period. Reciprocally, if the group
does not get a majority in favor of disclosing extraction, none of the group member’s extractions
will be displayed in this period.

   In all treatments, subjects get an historic which displays the group’s global extractions of all

                                                 16


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




the precedent periods of the sequence. Moreover, in treatment with individual extractions, they
also get an historic of individual extractions displayed. To enable the creation of reputation,
subjects are identified by a letter : A B C D or E, which remains unchanged during all the
experiment. The information displayed by treatment is presented in table 1.2.

                        Table 1.2 – Information disclosed by treatment

                           Treatment                   Information displayed
                            Baseline                              X(X−i )
                           Compulsory                            (+)xj , ∀j
                                        Individual   (+)xj , i 6= j if j vote in favor
               Voluntary dimension
                                         Majority    (+)xj , ∀j if ≥ 3 vote in favor

    This experiment is compounded of 3 parts : the two first parts rely on the two sequences
of the CPR game, and in the last one we replicate the Social Value Orientation test created by
Murphy et al. (2011). In this test, subjects make 15 allocations decisions between themselves and
an anonymous receiver. Their choices enable us to get an individual score reflecting the subject’s
preference for equal sharing.

    The experiment was conducted in the Laboratory of Experimental Economics of Montpellier
(LEEM) between July 2017 and January 2019. In total, 245 subjects participated (with 46
percent of women). Upon arrivals at the laboratory, each participant chose a cubicle where he
was seated in front of a computer terminal. Subjects were informed that the experiment consisted
of 3 parts. They received the corresponding instructions at the beginning of each part. Subjects
were invited to read the instructions privately before the person in charge of the experiment
read them one more time loudly. Subjects were informed that only one period of the CPR game,
randomly selected, would be paid. Additionally, they were paid for one of the SVO decisions, also
randomly selected at the end of the experiment. Before starting the experiment, each participant
answered a comprehension questionnaire. At the end of the experiment, subjects were asked if
they were able to identify the extraction that would maximize their group payoffs (the social
optimum). These answers were used by the experimenter to compute an understanding score and
a dummy variable reflecting the identification of the socially optimal extraction level.

    An experimental session lasted approximately two hours. The average earning was 16 euros
per subject in addition to a show-up fee of 2 or 6 euros depending on the distance of the subject’s
location from the LEEM. The experiments were conducted using Ztree (Fischbacher, 2007) for
the CPR game, the SVO test was coded in Python.

    In the following section, we detail our hypotheses about the effects of the different treatments
based on a behavioral framework. We also explain how we analyze the way individuals use the
information to modify their extraction.



1.4    Behavioral hypotheses

    To develop hypotheses about how the different information systems will affect subjects’ ex-
traction behavior, we first briefly explain the behavioral models that can be relevant to our
research question. Secondly, we expose how this theoretical framework can be reflected in dif-
ferent learning models.


                                                17


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




1.4.1    How behavioral aspects can explain the social information effect

    In this section, we present what are the possible effects on the extraction level of the two
dimensions that we test in this experiment, namely the provision of social information and the
voluntary feature of this provision.


Providing social information


    If we consider that subjects are not sensitive to any social comparison, providing social
information should not affect extraction behaviors. It will be reflected in self-interest behavior.

   Self-interest individual

    We consider the strategy of a purely self-interested individual. We can define the individual
payoff as
                                                                 (xi + X−i + 1)
                        πi (xi , X−i ) = axi − bx2i − xi × c ×
                                                                        2
This self-interested subject will try to maximize his payoff determining the optimal extraction
level
                        ∂πi (xi , X−i )
                                           = 2a − c(1 + X−i ) − xi (4b + 2c) = 0
                              ∂xi
Without taking into account the game constraints, the self-interested best reply is defined as
follow :
                                                    2a − c(1 + X−i )
                                      x̂Si (X−i ) =                                         (1.7)
                                                        4b + 2c
Incorporating the maximum extraction constraint gives us the individual’s best-response func-
tion :
                                   xSi (X−i ) = min[x̂Si (X−i ), xmax
                                                                  i   ]                     (1.8)
In contrast, if we consider that individuals are sensitive to social comparison due to others social
regarding preferences such as altruism (Levine, 1997), reciprocity (Sugden, 1984), inequality
aversion (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999) or conformity (Luzzati, 1999), getting information about other’s
actions should impact their behaviors. All these social preferences are taken into account in the
framework created by Velez et al. (2009). We adapted it to our CPR game to identify the effects
of these different social preferences on the extraction’s behavior.

   Other regarding preference : altruism, reciprocity and inequity aversion

    Considering that individual utility is not only affected by somedody’s own payoff but also
by others regarding preferences as altruism, reciprocity, and inequity aversion ; we define it as
follow :                                                   X
                                   Ui (πi , πj ) = πi + βi   πj                             (1.9)
                                                          j6=i

This parameter βi captures both altruism and reciprocity preferences in the following way :

                                                   αi + ϕ+
                                                         i , if   xi ≥ X̄−i
                        βi = βi (xi − X̄−i ) = {                                              (1.10)
                                                   αi − ϕ−
                                                         i , if   xi < X̄−i

The parameter captures αi the altruism aspect. It is the marginal value that i places on the
utility of other players and is independent of their choices. In contrast, the reciprocity preference

                                                   18


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



      −
ϕ+
 i , ϕi implies that the weight that the individual places on the payoffs of others is conditioned
                                                                         −
on the average level compared to his own. The parameters αi , ϕ+i and ϕi are positive constants.
The utility function can be express as follow :

                               (xi + X−i + 1)                X               (xi + X−i + 1)
 Ui = axi − bx2i − xi × c ×                   + βi [aX−i − b   x2j − X−i × c                ] (1.11)
                                      2                                             2
                                                                     j6=i

                         ∂Ui (xi , X−i )
Maximizing Ui , requires                 = 2a − c(1 + X−i ) − βi cX−i − xi (4b + 2c) = 0 Without
                              ∂xi
taking into account the extraction constraint, the best response to X−i equals :

                                             2a − c(1 + X−i ) − βi cX−i
                                 x̂βi (X−i ) =                                                    (1.12)
                                                         4b + 2c
                                                           −βi cX−i
                                           = x̂Si (X−i ) +                                        (1.13)
                                                            4b + 2c


   We do obtain :
                                                             cX−i
                        x̂β+           S                 +
                          i (X−i ) = x̂i (X−i ) − (αi + ϕi )                   , f or xi ≥ X̄−i
      x̂βi (X−i )   ={                                      4b + 2c                               (1.14)
                         β−           S                 − cX−i
                       x̂i (X−i ) = x̂i (X−i ) − (αi − ϕi )                    , f or xi < X̄−i
                                                            4b + 2c


    Incorporating the game constraint, the best response of an individual which is motivated by
a combination of altruism, reciprocity and pure self-interest is defined by :

                                    xβi (X−i ) = min[x̂βi (X−i ), xmax
                                                                   i   ]                          (1.15)


   Altruism

                                                                                −
   Now we consider that the individual has no preferences for reciprocity ϕ+
                                                                           i = ϕi = 0, but has
an altruism preference αi .

   The best response for an altruistic subject will be defined as follow :
                                                                      cX−i
                                    x̂αi (X−i ) = x̂Si (X−i ) − αi                                (1.16)
                                                                     4b + 2c


    This best response function has the same intercept than the self interest one x̂αi (0) = x̂Si (0).
However, it has a lower slope, meaning that the extraction choice reaction to others’ extraction
                      ∂ x̂Si (X−i )     −c      ∂ x̂αi (X−i )   −c(1 + αi )
will be lower. Indeed               =         >               =
                         ∂X−i         4b + 2c      ∂X−i          4b + 2c

   This fact conducts us to our first hypothesis.

    H1 : If the subject has altruistic preferences, the provision of social information should induce
less extraction (as illustrated in figure 1.1).




                                                      19


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




                            Figure 1.1 – Schema best response altruism.



   Reciprocity

    Here we consider that the individual has no altruist preference αi = 0 but a preference for
reciprocity. His best response will be equal to :
                                                          cX−i
                       x̂ϕ+           S           +
                         i (X−i ) = x̂i (X−i ) − ϕi ×              , f or xi ≥ X̄−i
        x̂ϕ       ={                                     4b + 2c
          i (X−i )                                                                           (1.17)
                       x̂ϕ− (X   ) =   x̂ S (X ) + ϕ− × cX−i       , f or x   < X̄
                         i    −i          i   −i    i                       i     −i
                                                         4b + 2c
Once again, the initial intercepts of those best response functions are the same as the self-
interested one. However, reciprocity induces a higher extraction in reaction to the average extrac-
tion if the subject has a lower extraction level than the average, compared to the self-interested
reaction. In comparison, it also induces a lower extraction reaction to the average extraction
when the subject has a higher extraction than the average. Indeed :
                               ∂ x̂ϕ+
                                   i (X−i )   ∂ x̂Si (X−i )    cϕ+i
                                            =               −
                                   ∂X−i          ∂X−i         4b + 2c
                               ∂ x̂ϕ−
                                   i (X−i )   ∂ x̂Si (X−i )    cϕ−i
                                            =               +
                                   ∂X−i          ∂X−i         4b + 2c
                             ∂ x̂ϕ+
                                 i (X−i )   ∂ x̂Si (X−i )   ∂ x̂ϕ−
                                                                i (X−i )
                                          <               <
                                 ∂X−i          ∂X−i             ∂X−i

    As long as the individual has an extraction level which is higher than the average, his reaction
follows the best reply function x̂ϕ+
                                  i (X−i ). When xi = X̄−i , his reaction follows the monotonic


                                                 20


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




increasing straight line xi = X̄−i . When his extraction is lower than the average extraction of
others group members his reaction is described by the best reply function x̂ϕ− i (X−i ). This is
illustrated in figure 1.2.

   Inequity aversion

    Velez et al. (2009) chose to express the utility function of subject which are inequity averse
this way Ui = πi − βi (πi − π̄−i ) With :

                                           ϕ+
                                            i   if    πi ≥ π̄−i
                                  βi = {
                                           −ϕ−i if    πi < π̄−i


   Falk et al. (2000), demonstrated that self-interest combined with inequality aversion generates
a best response function that has the same basic shape that the one generated by self-interest
combined with reciprocity.

   H2 : A preference for reciprocity can lead to a higher or a lower extraction dynamic, depending
on the fact that the subject has a lower or higher extraction than the average of the other group
members.




                           Figure 1.2 – Schema best response reciprocity.




   Now, we will consider another type of preferences which is the taste of conformity.

   Conformity

    Here individuals are motivated by a desire of conformity to the extraction behavior observed
in their group.

                                                21


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




   The individual i’s utility function is given by :

                                                      γi (xi − X̄−i )2
                                        Ui = πi −                                                  (1.18)
                                                             2
The parameter γi is a positive constant, reflecting the taste for conformity. Maximizing this
utility without taking into account the extraction constraints will correspond to
                       ∂Ui
                           = 2a − c − X−i (c + γi ) − xi (4b + 2c + 2γi ) = 0
                       ∂xi


   The best reply function without taking into account the game constrainst is equal to :

                                                     4b + 2c      X−i × 2γi /(n − 1)
                    x̂γi (X−i ) = x̂Si (X−i ) ×                 +                                  (1.19)
                                                  4b + 2c + 2γi    4b + 2c + 2γi


                                                                    4b + 2c
   This generates a lower intercept x̂Si (0) > x̂Si (0) ×                      , but the slope is higher.
                                                                 4b + 2c + 2γi
Indeed :
              ∂ x̂γi (X−i )   ∂ x̂Si (X−i )      4b + 2c     2γi /(n − 1)   ∂ x̂Si (X−i )
                            =               ×              +              >
                 ∂X−i            ∂X−i         4b + 2c + 2γi 4b + 2c + 2γi      ∂X−i

    H3 : The taste of conformity can generate a higher extraction dynamic than the best response
generated by self-interest. As a consequence, delivering social information about other members’
extractions can increase extraction compared to a situation where there is none.

    Providing social information can make subjects reciprocate positively or negatively depending
on the level of extractions disclosed. Moreover, the taste of conformity can also lead to increase
extractions. Let us now discuss the potential impacts of the voluntary dimension of extractions
display.


Voluntary dimension


    The effect of sending a signal about subject types and the expected behavior is stated as one
of the elements explaining the success of communication in a social action dilemma (Falk et al.,
2002). In their work, Falk et al. (2002) defend the idea that if individuals, who have social prefe-
rences, signal their types through a non-coercive mechanism like communication (cheap talk), it
can be sufficient to promote cooperation. We hypothesize that the voluntary disclosure mecha-
nism will act as a signal of willingness to cooperate. As a result, we consider that cooperators are
more likely to express their willingness to disclose extraction. By cooperator, we mean subjects
with a relatively lower level of extraction than others. We also assume that subjects with social
preferences will be more willing to cooperate and signal their willingness to do so through this
mechanism.

   H4 : Low extractors should be in favor of displaying information to signal their willingness to
cooperate.

    Moreover, considering that the majority of the subjects can be qualified as conditional coope-
rators (Fischbacher et al., 2001), which implies that subjects’ willingness to cooperate depends

                                                      22


         Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




on other members’ contributions ; we make the hypothesis that receiving a signal that the majo-
rity of subjects is willing to disclose their extractions level can facilitate cooperation. Chaudhuri
et al. (2006) also demonstrate that when subjects get informed that a majority of their group’s
members are willing to contribute if others do so, contributions are significantly higher. In order
words, we make the hypothesis that if the majority of the group signal its willingness to disclose
extraction level, and that this signal is a vector of the willingness to collaborate, group extrac-
tion should decrease. We also make the hypothesis that the Majority treatment will facilitate
the creation of a consensus on information disclosure.

    H5 : Cooperation within a group is fostered when the majority sends a signal that they are in
favour of information display.


1.4.2    Learning models

    Beyond this theoretical analysis, we develop an analysis to understand how the information
provided influences the dynamics of subjects’ exctractions within a sequence. It has been shown
that the behaviors observed in a repeated experiment cannot only be reduced to learning because
of the "restart effect" (Andreoni, 1988). Learning fails to explain why subjects increase their
contributions at the beginning of a new sequence, whereas those contributions were low in the
past period of the precedent sequence. However, we do argue that within a sequence, learning
analysis keeps its relevance because the subjects are not subject to the restart effect. In this case,
they can learn and adapt their strategies from one period to the next.

    Indeed, numerous Cournot markets experiments show that the type of information displayed
(feedback) strongly influence the group dynamic. Huck et al. (1999) and Offerman et al. (2002)
found that when subjects get a complete information, i.e. the individuals’ payoff, subjects tend
to imitate the most successful behavior (which is the highest quantity bought) leading to an
increasingly competitive market. Those results confirm Vega-Redondo (1997) argument that if
subjects imitate the most successful behavior, it leads to a Walrasian output.

    Nevertheless, little is known about how different feedbacks can affect behavior in collective ac-
tion issues. In public good Bigoni and Suetens (2012) and Carpenter (2004) found that delivering
respectively, a complete information, i.e. displaying individuals’ payoffs, or only the individual
actions, worsen the collective dynamic. In a CPR context, Villena and Zecchetto (2011) found
that delivering complete information also generates the imitation of the most successful behavior,
which accelerates the common tragedy.

    As a result, through learning strategy analysis, we aim to provide a new insight concerning
our understanding of how feedback affects group dynamics in collective action issues. To do so,
we adapt the learning models presented in Villena and Zecchetto (2011), taking into account
the specificities of our experiment in which subjects only get the individuals’ extraction (and
not individuals’ payoffs). This analysis is complementary to the theoretical approach. For each
of the learning models tested, we link with the effects of the different preferences mentioned
above. However, it is important to stress that they do not flow directly from it. In facts, a lot
of parameters exposed in the theoretical part cannot be measured. We must therefore make
hypotheses about how these different aspects impact the choices of extraction modifications.

     The self-interested best response, the subject i adopts an extraction level in period t
(xti )that would have maximized his payoffs in the precedent period (t − 1) considering the

                                                 23


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



                                          t−1
extraction of the other group members (X−i    ). In the model, the subject is myope and naive,
as he is considering that the other member’s extraction level will remain unchanged. However,
considering these elements, he has the most strategical use of the information disclosed.
                                              t−1
                      BRit = {z ∈ Γ : πi (z, X−i  ) ≥ πi (z 0 , X−i
                                                                 t−1
                                                                     ), ∀z 0 ∈ Γ}


                                                         t−1         t−1               t−1
   The best reply is given by the reaction function xBR          S                 S          max ].
                                                     i (X−i ) = xi (X−i ) = min[(x̂i (X−i ), xi


    Imitate the average, subject adopts an extraction level in period t, which is equal to the
average extraction of his group in the precedent period. It should be noted that in this model,
the subject takes into account both his own extraction level and the extraction of other members
of his group to calculate the average. This model reflects a taste for conformity to the social
norm that emerges from the group dynamic. We calculate it using IAti = X t−1 /n.

    Follow the exemplary, the individual adopts the extraction level observed in his group
in the precedent period that, if all group members adopted, it maximized the group payoffs.
In other words, the example is the extraction level that gives the highest sum of payoffs if all
subjects follow it. In this model, subjects express their willingness to reciprocate to the most
cooperative action observed positively.

                        F Eit = {∃j ∈ I : Σπi (xt−1         t−1
                                                j ) ≥ Σπi (xk ), ∀k ∈ I}



    Maximum extraction displays, the subject adopts the maximum extraction that was
observed in his group in the precedent period M AXit . This model can be viewed as the negative
reciprocation to the most extreme extraction observed.

    The two first models can be applied in all treatments. Such as in Baseline treatment where
subjects are only informed about the global extraction of their group (X) and their own ex-
traction level (xi ). The two last models can only be applied when subjects get informed about
others’ individual extractions (xj , ∀j 6= i). It corresponds to the Compulsory treatment. For the
Individual and Majority treatments, we took into account the extractions that were actually
displayed in each group at each period.

    To evaluate the performance of the different learnings at the individual level, we adapted the
estimation introduced in Huck et al. (1999), which was also reproduced in Bigoni and Suetens
(2012) :



 xti − xt−1
        i   = β0 + β1 (BRit − xt−1         t    t−1          t    t−1           t    t−1
                               i ) + β2 (IAi − xi ) + β3 (F Ei − xi ) + β4 (M AXi − xi ) (1.20)



    This analysis enables us to estimate how the theoretical prediction matches the real change
of contribution between two successive periods of the same sequence. To establish these models,
we determined theoretical extraction depending on different learning strategies for each subject
and at every period of the game, excluding the first ones of each sequence.




                                                  24


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




1.5     Experimental results

    Result 1 : There is no treatment effect. Neither providing social information nor the voluntary
disclosure mechanism are strong enough to promote and maintain cooperation.

    This result is illustrated in figure 1.3, where extractions trends are the same in all treatments.
Indeed, in all treatments, the average extraction level overpasses the Pareto Optimum (15,03
tokens). Through periods it keeps on increasing reaching 24 tokens in the last period, which
corresponds to the Nash equilibrium. The absence of treatment effects is also confirmed the
panel tobit estimation presented in table 1.3 and by Mann Withney test (cf to appendix 1.D.3).
In panel tobit estimation, treatments are presented by dummy variables, and we also control for
the period, the sequence and socio-demographic variables. As a consequence, the introduction
of an information sharing option does not affect the extraction levels compared to the baseline
condition. This result leads us to say that neither providing social information nor the voluntary
displaying of extractions are, per se, mechanisms that can avoid the overexploitation of the
resource.
                             30
                             25
                      Tokens extracted
                      10    15
                             5
                             0     20




                                         0   5           10                 15    20
                                                        Period
                                                 Baseline        Individual

                                                 Compulsory      Majority




    Figure 1.3 – Evolution of the average extraction by treatment in the social information experiment.




                                                      25


         Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



Table 1.3 – Panel tobit estimation of individuals extractions in the social information experiment (two sided,
random effects).

                                                               (1)        (2)
                                                             All data   All data
                                  PrelevementID
                                  Individual                  0.239       0.179
                                                             (0.522)     (0.521)

                                  Compulsory                  0.186       -0.346
                                                             (0.527)     (0.572)

                                  Majority                    0.520       0.514
                                                             (0.490)     (0.489)

                                  Sequence                    -2.851∗ ∗ ∗ -2.827∗ ∗ ∗
                                                             (0.493)     (0.499)

                                  Period                      0.404∗ ∗ ∗ 0.403∗ ∗ ∗
                                                             (0.0316)   (0.0327)

                                  SVO_score                               -10.50∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                         (1.897)

                                  Age                                   0.00595
                                                                        (0.0543)

                                  Gender                                  -1.154
                                                                         (0.712)

                                  Optimal_Identification                  -0.738
                                                                         (0.743)

                                  Understanding_score                    0.0199
                                                                         (0.224)

                                  _cons                       20.25∗ ∗ ∗ 25.68∗ ∗ ∗
                                                             (0.408)    (2.436)
                                  sigma_u
                                  _cons                       5.420∗ ∗ ∗ 5.143∗ ∗ ∗
                                                             (0.280)    (0.276)
                                  sigma_e
                                  _cons                        6.093∗ ∗ ∗ 6.088∗ ∗ ∗
                                                             (0.0745)    (0.0768)
                                  N                            4900        4600
                                  Standard errors in parentheses
                                      * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




    Result 2 : Subjects with higher social orientation value, which can be described as cooperative
type, have significantly lower extraction level.

    This result is confirmed by the strong significant negative effect of the variable SVO score
(expressed in radian), on the extraction level (see table 1.3). In other words, the more an indivi-
dual is concerned about equal sharing, which is an expression of the preference for altruism, the
less resource he will extract. This result seems to confirm our first hypothesis H1.

    Looking at other individual determinants, it is worth noticing that age and gender do not
affect the extraction level. Moreover, the variable "Optimal Identification", which is a dummy
variable reflecting the fact that the subject can identify the Pareto optimal extraction value, has
no significant effect. This means that knowing the level of extraction that allows the resource to
be preserved is not sufficient to maintain extraction at that level. In other words, even subjects
who identify the optimal extraction have a high extraction due to their group dynamics. Finally,


                                                        26


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




the understanding score that was calculated based on the comprehension questionnaire is not
correlated with the extraction. Therefore, the level of comprehension of the game incentives did
not interfere with the extraction strategy.

    To better understand why the mechanisms tested in these treatments are inefficient, we
analyze more deeply those group dynamics. We firstly analyze if the voluntary mechanisms were
used as a signal of cooperation. Indeed, if the voluntary mechanisms are used as a signal, then
individuals with lower extraction levels should be more likely to share their information and
doing so, signal their types. We analyze how the voluntary display mechanism evolves through
the game and how it impacts extractions. Secondly, we try to understand what drives the group
dynamics. In other words :"how do subjects modify their extraction strategy considering different
learning models ?"


1.5.1    Analysis of the voluntary displaying treatments

    Result 3 : The vote in favour of display is correlated with lower levels of extraction. In
the first period after the introduction of the voluntary disclosure, it is used as a signal for low
extractors.

    This result is supported by the panel tobit estimation presented in table 1.4, which is restricted
to the voluntary treatments : Individual and Majority. The dummy variable Vote, which is equal
to one when the subject was in favor of the display of his extraction level, has a significant
negative impact on extraction. When individuals are in favor of information display, they have a
lower extraction level. As a consequence, we argue that through the voluntary sharing mechanism,
subjects do signal their types and willingness to cooperate, confirming H4.

    This result is even more pronounced in the first period of these treatments, as illustrated
in figures 1.4. These figures represent the spread of extraction depending on the willingness to
display it in the first period of introduction of voluntary sharing mechanisms. In the Majority
disclose treatment, when subjects are in favor of information display, their median extraction is
16 tokens ; whereas it is around 25 tokens when subjects are against it. This difference is also
observed in the Individual disclose treatment, in which medians are respectively equal to 17.5 and
27 tokens. Those differences of extraction level due to subject willingness to display information
are highly significant using Mann Whitney test ; with the p-value respectively equal 0.000 and
0.001 in Individual and Majority treatment.




                                                 27


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




                                                                     Individual treatment                                                     Majority treatment




                                                  30




                                                                                                                          30
                                                  25




                                                                                                                          25
                                                          20




                                                                                                                                  20
                                         Tokens extracted




                                                                                                                  Tokens extrated
                                               15




                                                                                                                       15
                                                  10




                                                                                                                          10
                                                  5




                                                                                                                          5
                                                  0




                                                                                                                          0
                                                               Against display       In favor of display                               Against display        In favor of display




    Figure 1.4 – Extraction level in the first period depending on the willingness to display extractions.




    Nevertheless, through the game, the extraction level of subjects that express their willingness
to display keeps on increasing. To such a point that at the end of the game, they are no more
significantly different from subjects which are against it (as illustrated in figure 1.5).
                             30
                             25
                      Tokens extracted
                      10    15
                             5
                             0     20




                                         10                                 12                      14                                   16                      18                 20
                                                                                                              Period
                                                                                 In favor of display : Individual                                 Against display : Individual

                                                                                 In favor of display : Majority                                   Against display : Majority




 Figure 1.5 – Evolution of the average extraction level depending on the willingness to display extractions.




    To better understand why, even though cooperators do signal their willingness to display
information, these mechanisms are inefficient in generating cooperation, we have to analyze
more deeply this display dynamic. Overtime does a majority of subjects declare to be in favor of
display ? Then, we analyze if the fact that subjects get informed that a majority of their group
members are willing to cooperate impacts their extraction level. To finish, does the display of
the extractions of all group members have an impact on the individual extractions ?

   Result 4 : Getting a majority of individuals wishing to display their extractions does not
induce cooperation.


                                                                                                           28


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




    This result, which is refuting H5, is based on three intermediary results, which are presented
below.

   Result 4. 1 : Overtime, a majority of groups, vote in favor of sharing information. Conse-
quently, extractions of a majority of subjects were displayed in all periods of the game.

   This result is confirmed by the percentage of the groups having a majority of subjects (≥ 3
subjects) who were in favor of displaying extraction in each period. As illustrated in figure 1.6,
on both Individual and Majority treatments, at least 50 percent of the groups get a majority of
subjects who vote in favor of information display in every period.

    Those percentages are sharply higher when obtaining a majority induces display all group
members’ extractions, i.e., in the Majority treatment. In this treatment, a majority of subjects
(65.3 percent) vote between 8 and 10 times upon the 10 in favor of information display (as
illustrated in figure 1.7). This distribution’s difference between the two treatments is significant
(Epps Singleton test, p-value 0.011). We conclude that the Majority treatment generates a broad
consensus for information display, whereas Individual treatment induces a stronger heterogeneity.

                                                                                               100
                          10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                          93.3       93.3                                                     93.3                 93.3
                                                                86.7                                        86.7          86.7     86.7                 86.7

                                                                        75                                                       75
                                                            66.7                 66.7       66.7
                                    Percentage




                                                                                                      58.3          58.3                             58.3      58.3
                                                                                                                                           50
                                        0




                                                               11        12         13        14        15      16                17         18        19         20
                                                                                                          Period

                                                                                                   Individual                         Majority




       Figure 1.6 – Percentage of groups having a majority in favor of displaying their extractions.



                                                                             Individual                                                    Majority
                                          70




                                                                                                                   70
                                          60




                                                                                                                   60
                                          50




                                                                                                                   50
                                     40




                                                                                                                     40
                               percent




                                                                                                               percent
                                          30




                                                                                                                   30
                                          20




                                                                                                                   20
                                          10




                                                                                                                   10
                                          0




                                                                                                                   0




                                                              0       2        4       6       8       10                    0       2        4       6       8       10
                                                           Number of vote in favor of display per subject                 Number of vote in favor of display per subject




Figure 1.7 – Distribution of the number of vote in favor of display by subjects according to the treatment.



                                                                                                        29


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




   Result 4. 2 : Getting the majority of subjects to vote in favor of displaying extractions has
no impact on extraction levels.

    In both voluntary information treatment, subjects get the exact number of subjects who
vote in favor of extractions display, before they made their extractions choices. However, the
"Majority treatment" induces displaying all group member’s extractions, i.e., even of those who
were against it. That is the reason why the effect of receiving a signal that a majority of group
members is willing to display their extractions can only be measured in the Individual treatment.
The dummy variable "Majority in favor" presented in table 1.4, is equal to one if a majority of
subjects in the group vote (≥ 3) in favor of information display, and send this signal before they
make their extractions choices. It has no significant effect. We argue that the fact of receiving a
signal that a majority of subjects is willing to share information does not, per se, induce more
cooperative behaviors.

    Result 4. 3 : Displaying the extraction level of the group members does not impact the
extraction level.

    This result is provided by the dummy variable "Display" presented in table 1.4 which has
no significant effect on extractions. In other words, the fact of knowing that all group members’
extractions will be made public do not, per se, enable the group to reduce them. We can argue
that the fact of displaying extraction, when a subject was against it, can generate an even higher
extraction level. However, the dummy variable "Conflict", reflecting this fact (the individual vote
against information display but his group obtain a majority) does not affect the extraction level.

    To conclude, in Voluntary treatments, the subjects who have a relatively lower extraction
do signal their willingness to share information. However, those mechanisms are inefficient in
promoting and maintaining cooperation. This inefficiency cannot be explained by the fact that a
majority of subjects vote against displaying extractions. On the contrary, in all game’s periods, a
majority of the groups vote in favor of displaying extractions. It is especially true in the Majority
treatment were information display was adopted by the quasi totality of the group in all periods
of the game. That leads us to say that in this treatment, voting in favor of extractions display
became a consensus. However, as we have seen, neither receiving a signal that the majority wish
to display information, nor that all the choices of the group members will be made public, has
an impact on the extraction behavior. It is the reason why it appears determinant to understand
better what drives the group dynamic. More precisely, how do subjects modify their extractions
strategy from a period to another ? To do so, we consider the different simulations we get from
the learning strategies and compare them with the observations.




                                                 30


            Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



Table 1.4 – Panel tobit estimation of individuals extractions in voluntary sharing treatments (two sided,
random effects).

                                     (1)                 (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                           Information treatments   Individual Individual     Majority    Majority    Majority
  Vote                             -3.139∗ ∗ ∗         -4.210∗ ∗ ∗ -4.362∗ ∗ ∗ -2.121∗ ∗ ∗ -2.126∗ ∗ ∗ -3.994∗∗
                                  (0.489)             (0.721)      (0.762)     (0.662)     (0.678)     (1.656)

  Period                             0.363∗ ∗ ∗       0.244∗ ∗ ∗     0.250∗ ∗ ∗ 0.448∗ ∗ ∗ 0.448∗ ∗ ∗ 0.448∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0575)         (0.0879)       (0.0883)     (0.0760)  (0.0760)   (0.0758)

  SVO_score                         -5.329∗ ∗ ∗       -8.893∗∗      -8.886∗∗    -2.845     -2.844      -2.748
                                   (1.998)           (3.606)       (3.589)     (2.213)    (2.214)     (2.223)

  Age                               -0.0104          0.0623         0.0609      -0.0948    -0.0949    -0.0937
                                   (0.0548)         (0.0872)       (0.0868)    (0.0676)   (0.0676)   (0.0679)

  Gender                            -1.791∗∗          -3.226∗∗      -3.248∗∗    -1.325     -1.324      -1.238
                                   (0.788)           (1.421)       (1.415)     (0.872)    (0.872)     (0.878)

  Optimal_Identification            -1.133            -2.087        -2.148      -0.280     -0.278      -0.262
                                   (0.817)           (1.613)       (1.608)     (0.869)    (0.871)     (0.874)

  Understanding_score               -0.134            0.146         0.166       -0.335     -0.336      -0.320
                                   (0.236)           (0.429)       (0.428)     (0.260)    (0.261)     (0.262)

  Majority in favor                                                 0.464
                                                                   (0.746)

  Display                                                                                 0.0324       1.273
                                                                                          (0.898)     (1.344)

  Conflit                                                                                              -2.149
                                                                                                      (1.737)

  _cons                             25.21∗ ∗ ∗        26.29∗ ∗ ∗    25.87∗ ∗ ∗ 24.82∗ ∗ ∗ 24.80∗ ∗ ∗ 25.23∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (2.737)           (4.416)       (4.448)     (3.331)    (3.381)    (3.410)
  sigma_u
  _cons                             3.973∗ ∗ ∗        4.718∗ ∗ ∗    4.692∗ ∗ ∗ 3.105∗ ∗ ∗ 3.105∗ ∗ ∗ 3.123∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.330)           (0.567)       (0.567)     (0.374)    (0.375)    (0.375)
  sigma_e
  _cons                             5.805∗ ∗ ∗        5.778∗ ∗ ∗    5.776∗ ∗ ∗ 5.804∗ ∗ ∗ 5.804∗ ∗ ∗ 5.794∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.140)           (0.216)       (0.215)     (0.183)    (0.184)    (0.183)
  N                                 1350               600           600         750        750        750
  Standard errors in parentheses
                                      * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




1.5.2       Analysis of group dynamics

    Result 5 : The group extraction is driven by the adoption of the average extraction in the past
period and the self-interested best reply. It leads the group extraction to increase and to converge
to an extraction level which is close to Nash’s equilibrium.

    This result is corroborated by the learning analysis based on the panel tobit estimation
presented in table 1.5. In both sequences and for all treatments, the extraction change predicted
by the "imitating the average" model and the "self-interested best response" model is significantly
correlated with the observed changes. This result leads us to affirm that the "taste for conformity"
and the strategic response to the actions of others are the drivers of group dynamics. These results
allow us to understand the continuous increase in extraction, leading to the overexploitation of
the resource. Furthermore, they confirm our H3 hypothesis and are consistent with those of the

                                                     31


           Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




field experiment of Velez et al. (2009).

     It is also interesting to note that when the actions of individuals are automatically displayed
(i.e. Compulsory treatment), the imitation of the "the exemplary" is significantly correlated to
the extraction dynamic. Moreover, in this treatment, average imitation seems to have less in-
fluence. Thus, it can be assumed that this treatment induces positive reciprocity. Nevertheless,
given the final extraction, it is not enough to create and maintain cooperation. In order to better
understand what happens in this compulsory treatment, we analyze learning strategies by distin-
guishing subjects according to their type. This distinction is made based on the social orientation
value obtained in Murphy et al. (2011) test. We find three types : Prosocial, individualistic and
competitive subjects.


            Table 1.5 – Replication of Huck model, panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects

                                      (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)             (6)         (7)
                                 Baseline seq1      Baseline seq1     Baseline seq2      Baselibe seq2    Compulsory      Individual Majority
 Imitate the average                 0.445∗ ∗ ∗        0.391∗ ∗ ∗         0.564∗ ∗ ∗        0.585∗ ∗ ∗       0.248∗          0.643∗ ∗ ∗ 0.765∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0320)           (0.0638)          (0.0625)           (0.171)          (0.135)        (0.0850)     (0.115)

 Self interested best response       0.385∗ ∗ ∗        0.367∗ ∗ ∗         0.365∗ ∗ ∗        0.410∗ ∗ ∗       0.290∗ ∗ ∗     0.325∗ ∗ ∗ 0.353∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0221)           (0.0298)          (0.0416)           (0.0660)        (0.0590)       (0.0402)     (0.0421)

 Maximum extraction displayed                          0.0670                                -0.165          0.137        -0.00655     0.00263
                                                      (0.0546)                              (0.162)         (0.124)       (0.0352)     (0.0355)

 Follow the exemplary                                 0.000375                               0.117            0.139∗∗      -0.0734     0.000914
                                                      (0.0429)                             (0.0777)        (0.0655)       (0.0493)     (0.0882)
 [1em] _cons                          -1.950∗ ∗ ∗       -2.307∗ ∗ ∗         -0.946∗          0.663           -1.090         -0.763∗      -1.254∗∗
                                     (0.258)           (0.474)             (0.501)          (1.015)         (0.851)        (0.432)      (0.552)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                2.912∗ ∗ ∗       2.901∗ ∗ ∗           3.305∗ ∗ ∗       3.363∗ ∗ ∗      2.788∗ ∗ ∗     2.645∗ ∗ ∗ 2.694∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.227)          (0.227)              (0.442)          (0.444)         (0.414)        (0.430)     (0.346)
 sigma_e
 _cons                               5.198∗ ∗ ∗        5.198∗ ∗ ∗           4.064∗ ∗ ∗       4.038∗ ∗ ∗      4.220∗ ∗ ∗     4.753∗ ∗ ∗ 4.949∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0860)           (0.0860)             (0.141)          (0.140)         (0.147)        (0.160)     (0.147)
 N                                   2205               2205                 495              495             495            540         675
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




    The extractions of pro-socially oriented subjects continue to be mainly correlated to the
"imitation of the average" and "self-interested best reply". However, to a lesser extent, their
extractions are also correlated to the model "follow the exemplary". Whereas, in comparison,
the extraction dynamic of subjects with an individualistic or competitive social orientation, are
mainly correlated to the "self-interested best reply", and the "imitation of the highest extraction
displayed" (as illustrated in table 1.6). These results seem all the more interesting since, when
subjects only obtain aggregate information, all types can only adopt the same strategy, which is a
mixture of imitating the average and the best self-interested response (as illustrated in table 1.7).
These results lend credence to the argument that delivering information about individuals’ actions
and payoffs can worsen the tragedy of the commons. In fact, as Villena and Zecchetto (2011)
argue, some subjects will mimic the worst behavior, leading to faster overexploitation of the
resource.

    Nevertheless, further research needs to be carried out to distinguish the possible effects of in-
formation dissemination : 1) individuals’ actions and 2) a complete information. Indeed, Offerman
et al. (2002) in their experiment in the Cournot market show that subjects behave differently
depending on whether they obtain only the individuals’ actions (the quantities purchased) or

                                                                      32


          Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




individuals payoff. In the first case, they seem more inclined to imitate the smaller quantity
purchased ("follow the example"). In the second case, they imitate the strategies that lead to
the highest payoffs. Bigoni et al. (2012), in a public good experiment, have also shown that
group contribution collapses more rapidly when subjects obtain individual earnings compared
to a situation where they only receive individual contributions. They explain that some sub-
jects, the least willing to cooperate, tend to imitate the lowest contribution in the first situation.
Moreover, Croson (1995) ’s experiment with the public good shows that providing individual
contributions increases behavioral heterogeneity (with more free-riders and more cooperators).
Nevertheless, it is interesting to note that these results appear only after the second sequence in
which individuals are subjected to these conditions. In the case of our experiment, subjects are
subjected to different conditions only during a sequence, which may attenuate the appearance
of these differences.

    To sum up, in our experiment, it results that imitating the average and the best-interested
response are two reliable drivers of group dynamics. This combination can reasonably explain
the tendency to exceed the Pareto optimal extraction and reach the Nash equilibrium. In doing
so, the resource is overexploited. This result seems to apply to the larger part of the CPR
where there is no mechanism that effectively induces cooperation. Moreover, it appears that
when subjects obtain information about the actions of others, the more individualistic ones
mimic the worst behavior (maximum extraction displayed). Those findings are consistent with
the thesis that the dissemination of information about the actions of individuals can make the
group production collapse more rapidly. It calls for further investigations to better understand
how social preferences can influence how subjects respond to social information.


Table 1.6 – Replication of Huck model for the Complusory treatment distinguishing by subjects types, panel
tobit estimation two sided, random effects.

                                      (1)         (2)            (3)                  (4)            (5)             (6)
                                  Pro social   Pro social   Individualist       Individualist    Competitive     Competitive
  Imitate the average               0.576∗ ∗ ∗   0.500∗ ∗ ∗     0.192∗              -0.404∗∗        0.643∗ ∗ ∗     -0.0802
                                   (0.0805)     (0.182)        (0.116)             (0.189)         (0.171)         (0.343)

  Self interested best response    0.313∗ ∗ ∗  0.289∗ ∗ ∗          0.466∗ ∗ ∗       0.310∗ ∗ ∗      0.321∗          0.233∗
                                  (0.0559)    (0.0765)            (0.0774)        (0.0820)         (0.180)         (0.140)

  Maximum extraction displayed                    -0.0964                          0.528∗ ∗ ∗                       0.885∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.157)                         (0.168)                          (0.314)

  Follow the exemplary                              0.181∗                        0.0835                           -0.0538
                                                  (0.0969)                        (0.103)                          (0.173)

  _cons                             -2.062∗ ∗ ∗    -0.399          -1.081∗         -3.227∗ ∗ ∗      1.243           -3.213
                                   (0.682)        (1.137)         (0.569)         (1.248)          (1.219)         (2.179)
  sigma_u
  _cons                             3.229∗ ∗ ∗     3.126∗ ∗ ∗      1.376∗         8.92e-17          1.684           0.701
                                   (0.564)        (0.560)         (0.715)         (1.300)          (1.144)         (1.359)
  sigma_e
  _cons                             4.138∗ ∗ ∗     4.119∗ ∗ ∗      4.343∗ ∗ ∗      4.377∗ ∗ ∗       4.291∗ ∗ ∗      4.167∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.187)        (0.187)         (0.278)         (0.250)          (0.458)         (0.442)
  N                                  288            288             153             153               54             54
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                             33


          Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



Table 1.7 – Replication of Huck model for the Baseline conditions during sequence distinguishing by subjects
types, panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects.

                                      (1)          (2)           (3)                 (4)             (5)              (6)
                                  Pro social   Pro social   Individualist       Individualist    Competitive      Competitive
  Imitate the average               0.451∗ ∗ ∗   0.408∗ ∗ ∗     0.431∗ ∗ ∗          0.324∗ ∗ ∗      0.534∗ ∗ ∗       0.596∗∗
                                   (0.0423)     (0.0880)      (0.0506)            (0.0990)         (0.136)          (0.244)

  Self interested best response    0.392∗ ∗ ∗  0.379∗ ∗ ∗          0.353∗ ∗ ∗       0.308∗ ∗ ∗       0.532∗ ∗ ∗      0.566∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.0295)    (0.0406)            (0.0351)        (0.0484)         (0.0852)         (0.114)

  Maximum extraction displayed                     0.0435                          0.156                             -0.128
                                                  (0.0707)                        (0.0956)                          (0.224)

  Follow the exemplary                            0.00665                        -0.0000583                         0.0213
                                                  (0.0609)                        (0.0658)                          (0.145)

  _cons                             -2.774∗ ∗ ∗    -2.957∗ ∗ ∗     -0.881∗∗        -1.724∗∗         -1.325           -0.559
                                   (0.330)        (0.636)         (0.396)         (0.767)          (1.542)          (2.069)
  sigma_u
  _cons                             2.331∗ ∗ ∗     2.308∗ ∗ ∗      2.826∗ ∗ ∗      2.888∗ ∗ ∗       5.841∗ ∗ ∗       5.723∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.284)        (0.287)         (0.361)         (0.363)          (1.281)          (1.283)
  sigma_e
  _cons                             5.378∗ ∗ ∗     5.381∗ ∗ ∗      4.989∗ ∗ ∗      4.970∗ ∗ ∗       4.648∗ ∗ ∗       4.653∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.119)        (0.119)         (0.135)         (0.134)          (0.289)          (0.290)
  N                                 1224           1224             828             828              153              153
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                             34


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




1.6    Discussion

    This study aims to analyze how social information can impact subjects’ extraction behavior
in a CPR context. To do so, we focus on two dimensions : i) the effect of providing information
about the actions of other group members (i.e. social information), and ii) the effect of the
voluntary disclosure of this information.

    The voluntary dimension in the information disclosure did not foster collective action in a
CPR context. In fact, contrary to the results found by Kreitmair (2015) in a public good expe-
riment, we did not find that enabling subjects to vote if they want their actions to be displayed,
and informing them about the vote result before they make their decisions, increases coopera-
tion. This difference in efficiency may be due to the rivalry inherent in the common pool context.
However, it is worth noticing that voluntary mechanisms are used as a signal of the willingness
to cooperate. The willingness to display extraction is correlated with lower extraction levels. It
is particularly true during the first period after the introduction of those mechanisms, where the
extraction levels of subjects who vote in favor of disclosure are significantly lower than those
observed for subjects who vote against it. Nevertheless, this signal is inefficient to induce coope-
ration. Indeed, through periods, the extraction level of subjects willing to disclose information
keeps on increasing, following the group dynamic. This inefficiency cannot be explained by the
fact that only a small percentage of subjects vote in favor of information disclosed, and only a
small part of the groups gets a majority who was in favor of information display. In fact, at every
period at least 50 percent of the groups had a majority of subjects that was in favor of displaying
their extractions. In the Majority treatment, the percentage is even higher than 80 percent on
average for all the groups. It leads us to argue that, in this treatment, delivering information
became a consensus. As a consequence, receiving the signal that a majority is willing to display
information does not enable to generate cooperation of all group members, even when it is a
credible signal of the willingness to reduce extraction.

    The provision of information on the actions of other members does not in itself generate
cooperation in CPR context. For all treatments, i.e. with only aggregated information or with
individual information, group extraction continues to increase, exceeding the Pareto optimum
and leading to the Nash equilibrium. The analytical framework we have developed provides
some explanation for these results. Indeed, for subjects with prosocial preferences (willing to
reciprocate or with inequality aversion) or with a taste for conformity, the provision of social
information could lead to an increase in their extractions.

    The analysis of how information is used to modify the extraction strategies seems to point out
the same explanation. The learning analysis enables us to identify that "imitating the average" as
well as the "self-interested best reply" are the models who best explain the extractions observed.
This result shows that the taste of conformity may play a substantial role in the observed
behaviors. Our results partially confirmed Velez et al. (2009) ones, who found that the best
reply integrating a preference for conformity in the utility function is the one that best explains
their observations. This result also confirms the convergence of behaviors to the average of the
actions displayed observed in other experiments (Schultz, 1999 ; Schultz et al., 2007 ; Croson
& Shang, 2008). When we distinguish the analysis by type of subjects, we find that when the
actions of individuals are displayed, subjects with an individualistic orientation of social values
tend to imitate the worst (most extractive) behaviors. In comparison, prosocial subjects seem
to keep the same behavior, which is a mixture of imitating the average and the self-interested
best reply. The attitude of subjects with an individualistic and competitive social orientation
thus seems to induce an increase in average extraction. Because of the dynamics of conformity

                                                35


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




and reciprocity, the latter is amplified. This result gives credence to the argument that delivering
information about individuals’ actions and payoffs can worsen the collective action dynamic
(Villena & Zecchetto, 2011 ; Bigoni et al., 2012), or lead to more competitive behaviors in different
contexts (Huck et al., 1999 ; Offerman et al., 2002 and Huck et al., 2017). Nevertheless, the
difference in the potential effect of displaying individuals’ actions and displaying individuals’
earnings in the CPR is not yet clear.

    Those results call for more investigation about how social information, and more precisely
how different kinds of feedback (i.e. information on the actions carried out by the co-users)
impact natural resource management. Indeed, in most real-life situations, users do not have the
information about the total group extraction (X) nor the average members’ extraction (x¯j ).
There are substantial reasons to think that delivering this information can impact the subjects’
behaviors. Paying particular attention to how information is used according to the types of
subjects may be an interesting research path. Moreover, in real situations, we can consider that
some subjects might be sensitive to their image. It implies that their utilities are affected by
the moral cost of their actions, and this latter is even higher when their wrong actions are
made public (Levitt & List, 2007). In this case, information disclosure can have an impact, and
more specifically, it can reinforce the disapproval mechanisms (both symbolic and costly ones).
Finally, little is known about the effects of the informational mechanism (such as the addition
of an injunctive norm) in a context where users are strictly dependent on the resource and rivals
in its use, such as those characterizing many CPR.




                                                 36


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




References

   ANDREONI, J. 1988. Why free ride ? : Strategies and learning in public goods experiments.
Journal of Public Economics, 37, 291-304.

   APESTEGUIA, J. 2006. Does information matter in the commons ? : Experimental evidence.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 60, 55-69.

   APESTEGUIA, J. & MAIER-RIGAUD, F. P. 2006. The role of rivalry public goods versus
common-pool resources. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 50, 646-663.

   BIGONI, M. & SUETENS, S. 2012. Feedback and dynamics in public good experiments.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 82, 86-95.

   BURGER-LEENHARDT, D., DEMAREZ, V., GARIN, P., LHUISSIER, L. & MURGUE, C.
2018. Gestion quantitative de l’eau en territoires irrigués : intérêt et contraintes du numérique
aux différentes échelles de décision

   CARPENTER, J. P. 2004. When in Rome : conformity and the provision of public goods.
The Journal of Socio-Economics, 33, 395-408.

   CHAUDHURI, A. & PAICHAYONTVIJIT, T. 2006. Conditional cooperation and voluntary
contributions to a public good. Economics Bulletin, 3, 1-14.

   COLLARD, A.-L., MONTGINOUL, M. & GARIN, P. 2019. Un compteur «intelligent» pour
mesurer les usages de l’eau : l’entrée en scène d’une nouvelle connaissance. Développement du-
rable et territoires. Économie, géographie, politique, droit, sociologie, 10.

   CROSON, R. 1995. Feedback in voluntary contributions mechanismes : An experiment in
team production Discussion Paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

   CROSON, R. & SHANG, J. Y. 2008. The impact of downward social information on contri-
bution decisions. Experimental Economics, 11, 221-233.

    DIETZ, T., OSTROM, E. & STERN, P. C. 2003. The struggle to govern the commons.
science, 302, 1907-1912.

    FALK, A., FEHR, E. & FISCHBACHER, U. 2002. Appropriating the commons : A theoretical
explanation, CESifo.

   FEHR, E. & SCHMIDT, K. M. 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
Quarterly journal of Economics, 817-868.

   FEHR, E. & WILLIAMS, T. 2018. Social norms, endogenous sorting and the culture of
cooperation.

    FERRARO, P. J. & PRICE, M. K. 2013. Using nonpecuniary strategies to influence behavior :
evidence from a large-scale field experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 64-73.

   FISCHBACHER, U. 2007. z-Tree : Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments.

                                               37


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




Experimental economics, 10, 171-178.

    FISCHBACHER, U. & GÄCHTER, S. 2010. Social Preferences, Beliefs, and the Dynamics
of Free Riding in Public Goods Experiments. The American Economic Review, 100, 541-556.

    FISCHBACHER, U., GÄCHTER, S. & FEHR, E. 2001. Are people conditionally coopera-
tive ? Evidence from a public goods experiment. Economics letters, 71, 397-404.

   HARDIN, G. 1968. The tragedy of the commons. science, 162, 1243-1248.

    HERR, A., GARDNER, R. & WALKER, J. M. 1997. An experimental study of time-
independent and time-dependent externalities in the commons. Games and Economic Behavior,
19, 77-96.

   HUCK, S., NORMANN, H.-T. & OECHSSLER, J. 1999. Learning in Cournot Oligopoly –
an Experiment. The Economic Journal, 109, 80-95.

   HUCK, S., LEUTGEB, J. & OPREA, R. 2017. Payoff information hampers the evolution of
cooperation. Nature communications, 8, 15147.

   JANSSEN, M. A. & SCHEFFER, M. 2004. Overexploitation of Renewable Resources by
Ancient Societies and the Role of Sunk-Cost Effects. Ecology and Society, 9.

    JANSSEN, M., TYSON, M. & LEE, A. 2014. The effect of constrained communication and
limited information in governing a common resource. International Journal of the Commons, 8.

    JANSSEN, M. A. 2013. The role of information in governing the commons : Experimental
results. Ecology and Society, 18, 4.

   KREITMAIR, U. 2015. Voluntary disclosure of contributions : an experimental study on
nonmandatory approaches for improving public good provision. Ecology and Society, 20.

   LEVINE, D. K. 1998. Modeling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiments. Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, 1, 593-622.

   LEVITT, D. & LIST, J. A. 2007. What Do Laboratory Experiment Measuring Social Prefe-
rences Reveal About the Real World ? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21.

   LUZZATI, T. 1999. Economic theory and conformism (Vol. 68). Edward Elgar Publishing,
Cheltenham Glos, UK.

    MURPHY, R. O., ACKERMANN, K. A. & HANDGRAAF, M. 2011. Measuring social value
orientation. Judgment and Decision Making, 6, 771-781.

    OFFERMAN, T., POTTERS, J. & SONNEMANS, J. 2002. Imitation and Belief Learning
in an Oligopoly Experiment. The Review of Economic Studies, 69, 973-997.

    OSTROM, E. 1990. Governing the commons : The evolution of institutions for collective
action, Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.



                                            38


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




    OSTROM, E. 1998. A behavioral approach to the rational choice theory of collective action :
Presidential address, American Political Science Association, 1997. American political science
review, 92, 1-22.

   SAIJO, T. & NAKAMURA, H. 1995. The “Spite” Dilemma in Voluntary Contribution Me-
chanism Experiments. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 39, 535-560.

   SCHULTZ, P. W. 1999. Changing behavior with normative feedback interventions : A field
experiment on curbside recycling. Basic and applied social psychology, 21, 25-36.

    SCHULTZ, P. W., NOLAN, J. M., CIALDINI, R. B., GOLDSTEIN, N. J. & GRISKEVI-
CIUS, V. 2007. The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psycho-
logical science, 18, 429-434.

   SUGDEN, R. 1984. Reciprocity : the supply of public goods through voluntary contributions.
The Economic Journal, 94, 772-787.

   VEGA-REDONDO, F. 1997. The Evolution of Walrasian Behavior. Econometrica, 65, 375-
384.

   VELEZ, M. A., STRANLUND, J. K. & MURPHY, J. J. 2009. What motivates common
pool resource users ? Experimental evidence from the field. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 70, 485-497.

    VILLENA, M. G. & ZECCHETTO, F. 2011. Subject-specific performance information can
worsen the tragedy of the commons : Experimental evidence. Journal of Economic Psychology,
32, 330-347.

   WALKER, J. M., GARDNER, R., HERR, A. & OSTROM, E. 2000. Collective choice in the
commons : experimental results on proposed allocation rules and votes. The Economic Journal,
110, 212-234.

   WEIMANN, J. 1994. Individual behaviour in a free riding experiment. Journal of Public
Economics, 54, 185-200.




                                              39


Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




                                     40


                                                           Appendices of chapter 1




1.A     Instructions of the social information experiment

1.A.1    Common pool resource

   Here are presented the translate of the experiment instructions we used. There originally
were given in french.

   Welcome

    The experiment you are going to participate in is for the study of decision making. We ask you
to read the instructions carefully. They must enable you to understand the experiment. When
all the participants have read them, an experimenter will read them aloud.

    All your decisions will be treated anonymously. You will indicate your choices to the computer
in front of which you are sitting.

   During the experiment, you will accumulate gains expressed in ECU. At the end of the
experiment, your ECU will be converted into euros according to a conversion rate which is
specified at the end of these instructions.

    This experiment has three parts. From now on, we ask you to stop talking. If you have a
question, raise your hand and an experimenter will come to answer you in private. The attached
instructions are from Part 1. The instructions in Part 2 and 3 will be distributed at the end of
each game.




                                               41


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




   Part 1
   1. General framework

   At the beginning of the experiment, the central computer will randomly train groups of 5.
The composition of these groups will remain unchanged throughout the game. In each
group each will be assigned an identifier, A, B, C, D or E, which he will keep for the whole game.

    The game has 10 periods. In each period, you and the four other people in your group
will have to decide each one of the number of chips to be charged in a common account.

    Each token charged earns BENEFIT, explained below, and generates a COST, which de-
pends on total extraction made by the group (your extraction + the extraction of others). The
calculation COST of levy is detailed in the following instructions.

    At each period, your PAYOFF will be equal to the difference between your income and your
cost. PAYOFF= BENEFIT – COST


   2. Benefit

    Each token collected earns benefit as described in Table 1. Each cell in the table indicates
the benefit according to the quantity taken. Each member of the group can collect at maximum
30 tokens. Example 1 : You decide to take 15 tokens. Your benefit will be 57.54 ECU.




   3. Extraction cost

   Unity cost of extraction :

    Each token collected generates a cost that depends not only on the amount of tokens you
collect, but also the amount taken by the other members of your group. The more the number
of tokens collected by your group is high, the higher the unit cost of extraction will be. The rule
is the following : the cost of the first token is equal to 0.05 ECU and each additional token costs
0,05 ECU in addition to the previous one.

    Example 2 : Your group collects 30 tokens. The first token costs 0.05 ECU, the second token
costs 0.10 ECU, the third costs 0.15 ECU and so on until the 30th, which will cost 1.50 ECU.


   Average cost of extraction :

   The AVERAGE Token Cost in a round will be the same for each participant. The "average
token cost" in a given decision round can easily be computed as :

   [(BASE COST)+(COST OF THE LAST TOKEN ORDERED IN THE ROUND)]/2


                                                42


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




    Example 2 (follow) : The first token costs 0.05 ECU and the last (the thirtieth) 1.50 ECU.
The average cost per token for a 30 token is therefore equal to (0.05 + 1.50) / 2 = 0.775 ECU
per token.


   Individual extraction cost :

   The individual cost of each member depends on the amount collected. Precisely, the indi-
vidual cost is equal to the individual quantity extracted multiplied by the average cost.

    Example 2 (follow) : If the average cost is 0.775 ECU and you take 6 tokens out of 30 tokens
extracted by your group (which corresponds to an extraction of 24 tokens made by the other four
members), your individual cost is equal to 6 0.775 = 4.65 ECU.

   It is the individual cost of extraction that will be deducted from your benefit to determine
your payoff during the period.

   Table 2 shows the cost of extraction. Each cell indicates your individual cost of extraction
based on your own extraction and the extraction of 4 other members of your group.
This table is identical for all members of your group.




                                              43


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context
     Cost of your order                                                                                                                                                                Tokens you order

                                0         1         2         3          4          5          6          7          8          9          10          11          12          13          14          15          16          17          18          19          20          21          22          23          24          25          26          27           28           29           30
                        0   -       0,1       0,2       0,3        0,5        0,8        1,1        1,4        1,8        2,3        2,8         3,3         3,9         4,6         5,3         6,0         6,8         7,7         8,6         9,5        10,5        11,6        12,7        13,8        15,0        16,3        17,6        18,9         20,3         21,8         23,3
                        4   -       0,2       0,4       0,6        0,9        1,3        1,7        2,1        2,6        3,2        3,8         4,4         5,1         5,9         6,7         7,5         8,4         9,4        10,4        11,4        12,5        13,7        14,9        16,1        17,4        18,8        20,2        21,6         23,1         24,7         26,3
                        8   -       0,3       0,6       0,9        1,3        1,8        2,3        2,8        3,4        4,1        4,8         5,5         6,3         7,2         8,1         9,0        10,0        11,1        12,2        13,3        14,5        15,8        17,1        18,4        19,8        21,3        22,8        24,3         25,9         27,6         29,3
                       12   -       0,4       0,8       1,2        1,7        2,3        2,9        3,5        4,2        5,0        5,8         6,6         7,5         8,5         9,5        10,5        11,6        12,8        14,0        15,2        16,5        17,9        19,3        20,7        22,2        23,8        25,4        27,0         28,7         30,5         32,3
                       16   -       0,5       1,0       1,5        2,1        2,8        3,5        4,2        5,0        5,9        6,8         7,7         8,7         9,8        10,9        12,0        13,2        14,5        15,8        17,1        18,5        20,0        21,5        23,0        24,6        26,3        28,0        29,7         31,5         33,4         35,3
                       20   -       0,6       1,2       1,8        2,5        3,3        4,1        4,9        5,8        6,8        7,8         8,8         9,9        11,1        12,3        13,5        14,8        16,2        17,6        19,0        20,5        22,1        23,7        25,3        27,0        28,8        30,6        32,4         34,3         36,3         38,3
                       24   -       0,7       1,4       2,1        2,9        3,8        4,7        5,6        6,6        7,7        8,8         9,9        11,1        12,4        13,7        15,0        16,4        17,9        19,4        20,9        22,5        24,2        25,9        27,6        29,4        31,3        33,2        35,1         37,1         39,2         41,3
                       28   -       0,8       1,6       2,4        3,3        4,3        5,3        6,3        7,4        8,6        9,8        11,0        12,3        13,7        15,1        16,5        18,0        19,6        21,2        22,8        24,5        26,3        28,1        29,9        31,8        33,8        35,8        37,8         39,9         42,1         44,3
                       32   -       0,9       1,8       2,7        3,7        4,8        5,9        7,0        8,2        9,5       10,8        12,1        13,5        15,0        16,5        18,0        19,6        21,3        23,0        24,7        26,5        28,4        30,3        32,2        34,2        36,3        38,4        40,5         42,7         45,0         47,3
                       36   -       1,0       2,0       3,0        4,1        5,3        6,5        7,7        9,0       10,4       11,8        13,2        14,7        16,3        17,9        19,5        21,2        23,0        24,8        26,6        28,5        30,5        32,5        34,5        36,6        38,8        41,0        43,2         45,5         47,9         50,3
                       40   -       1,1       2,2       3,3        4,5        5,8        7,1        8,4        9,8       11,3       12,8        14,3        15,9        17,6        19,3        21,0        22,8        24,7        26,6        28,5        30,5        32,6        34,7        36,8        39,0        41,3        43,6        45,9         48,3         50,8         53,3
44




                       44   -       1,2       2,4       3,6        4,9        6,3        7,7        9,1       10,6       12,2       13,8        15,4        17,1        18,9        20,7        22,5        24,4        26,4        28,4        30,4        32,5        34,7        36,9        39,1        41,4        43,8        46,2        48,6         51,1         53,7         56,3
                       48   -       1,3       2,6       3,9        5,3        6,8        8,3        9,8       11,4       13,1       14,8        16,5        18,3        20,2        22,1        24,0        26,0        28,1        30,2        32,3        34,5        36,8        39,1        41,4        43,8        46,3        48,8        51,3         53,9         56,6         59,3
      Tokens order     52   -       1,4       2,8       4,2        5,7        7,3        8,9       10,5       12,2       14,0       15,8        17,6        19,5        21,5        23,5        25,5        27,6        29,8        32,0        34,2        36,5        38,9        41,3        43,7        46,2        48,8        51,4        54,0         56,7         59,5         62,3
                       56   -       1,5       3,0       4,5        6,1        7,8        9,5       11,2       13,0       14,9       16,8        18,7        20,7        22,8        24,9        27,0        29,2        31,5        33,8        36,1        38,5        41,0        43,5        46,0        48,6        51,3        54,0        56,7         59,5         62,4         65,3
         by the 4
                       60   -       1,6       3,2       4,8        6,5        8,3       10,1       11,9       13,8       15,8       17,8        19,8        21,9        24,1        26,3        28,5        30,8        33,2        35,6        38,0        40,5        43,1        45,7        48,3        51,0        53,8        56,6        59,4         62,3         65,3         68,3
     others players    64   -       1,7       3,4       5,1        6,9        8,8       10,7       12,6       14,6       16,7       18,8        20,9        23,1        25,4        27,7        30,0        32,4        34,9        37,4        39,9        42,5        45,2        47,9        50,6        53,4        56,3        59,2        62,1         65,1         68,2         71,3
      in your group    68   -       1,8       3,6       5,4        7,3        9,3       11,3       13,3       15,4       17,6       19,8        22,0        24,3        26,7        29,1        31,5        34,0        36,6        39,2        41,8        44,5        47,3        50,1        52,9        55,8        58,8        61,8        64,8         67,9         71,1         74,3
                       72   -       1,9       3,8       5,7        7,7        9,8       11,9       14,0       16,2       18,5       20,8        23,1        25,5        28,0        30,5        33,0        35,6        38,3        41,0        43,7        46,5        49,4        52,3        55,2        58,2        61,3        64,4        67,5         70,7         74,0         77,3
                       76   -       2,0       4,0       6,0        8,1       10,3       12,5       14,7       17,0       19,4       21,8        24,2        26,7        29,3        31,9        34,5        37,2        40,0        42,8        45,6        48,5        51,5        54,5        57,5        60,6        63,8        67,0        70,2         73,5         76,9         80,3
                       80   -       2,1       4,2       6,3        8,5       10,8       13,1       15,4       17,8       20,3       22,8        25,3        27,9        30,6        33,3        36,0        38,8        41,7        44,6        47,5        50,5        53,6        56,7        59,8        63,0        66,3        69,6        72,9         76,3         79,8         83,3
                       84   -       2,2       4,4       6,6        8,9       11,3       13,7       16,1       18,6       21,2       23,8        26,4        29,1        31,9        34,7        37,5        40,4        43,4        46,4        49,4        52,5        55,7        58,9        62,1        65,4        68,8        72,2        75,6         79,1         82,7         86,3
                       88   -       2,3       4,6       6,9        9,3       11,8       14,3       16,8       19,4       22,1       24,8        27,5        30,3        33,2        36,1        39,0        42,0        45,1        48,2        51,3        54,5        57,8        61,1        64,4        67,8        71,3        74,8        78,3         81,9         85,6         89,3
                       92   -       2,4       4,8       7,2        9,7       12,3       14,9       17,5       20,2       23,0       25,8        28,6        31,5        34,5        37,5        40,5        43,6        46,8        50,0        53,2        56,5        59,9        63,3        66,7        70,2        73,8        77,4        81,0         84,7         88,5         92,3
                       96   -       2,5       5,0       7,5       10,1       12,8       15,5       18,2       21,0       23,9       26,8        29,7        32,7        35,8        38,9        42,0        45,2        48,5        51,8        55,1        58,5        62,0        65,5        69,0        72,6        76,3        80,0        83,7         87,5         91,4         95,3
                      100   -       2,6       5,2       7,8       10,5       13,3       16,1       18,9       21,8       24,8       27,8        30,8        33,9        37,1        40,3        43,5        46,8        50,2        53,6        57,0        60,5        64,1        67,7        71,3        75,0        78,8        82,6        86,4         90,3         94,3         98,3
                      104   -       2,7       5,4       8,1       10,9       13,8       16,7       19,6       22,6       25,7       28,8        31,9        35,1        38,4        41,7        45,0        48,4        51,9        55,4        58,9        62,5        66,2        69,9        73,6        77,4        81,3        85,2        89,1         93,1         97,2        101,3
                      108   -       2,8       5,6       8,4       11,3       14,3       17,3       20,3       23,4       26,6       29,8        33,0        36,3        39,7        43,1        46,5        50,0        53,6        57,2        60,8        64,5        68,3        72,1        75,9        79,8        83,8        87,8        91,8         95,9        100,1        104,3
                      112   -       2,9       5,8       8,7       11,7       14,8       17,9       21,0       24,2       27,5       30,8        34,1        37,5        41,0        44,5        48,0        51,6        55,3        59,0        62,7        66,5        70,4        74,3        78,2        82,2        86,3        90,4        94,5         98,7        103,0        107,3
                      116   -       3,0       6,0       9,0       12,1       15,3       18,5       21,7       25,0       28,4       31,8        35,2        38,7        42,3        45,9        49,5        53,2        57,0        60,8        64,6        68,5        72,5        76,5        80,5        84,6        88,8        93,0        97,2        101,5        105,9        110,3
                      120   -       3,1       6,2       9,3       12,5       15,8       19,1       22,4       25,8       29,3       32,8        36,3        39,9        43,6        47,3        51,0        54,8        58,7        62,6        66,5        70,5        74,6        78,7        82,8        87,0        91,3        95,6        99,9        104,3        108,8        113,3


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




   4. Payoff for the period

    Your payoff in each period is equal to the difference between your Benefit and your individual
cost of extraction. To make it easier for you to identify your potential winnings in each period,
Table 3 shows your payoff based on your extraction and the extraction of the other 4 members
of your group. Table 3 was constructed by differentiating between the benefits table (Table 1)
and the cost table (Table 2).

    Example 3 : You decide to collect 20 tokens, the other four members of the group take 20
tokens each (a total extraction of 80). You get a gain of 25.9 ECU.

    Example 4 : You decide to collect 20 tokens, the other four members of the group take 10
tokens each (a total extraction of 40). You get a gain of 45.9 ECU.


   5. Explanation of the method of remuneration and the conversion of ECU into
euros

    You will be paid according to the earnings you have earned during a period. This period will
be randomly drawn from among the 20 periods comprising all of the two parts, that is to say,
this part and the one that will follow (whose instructions will be distributed to you later). The
draw will be done at the end of the game.

    The conversion rate of ECU into euros is 0.75. For example, if you earn 20 ECU you will get
15 euros.




                                               45


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context
           Your payoff                                                                                                                                                                          Tokens you order
                               0         1         2          3          4          5          6          7          8          9          10          11          12          13          14         15         16          17          18          19          20          21          22          23          24          25          26          27          28          29          30
                           0   0   3,8       7,6       11,3       15,0       18,6       22,2       25,7       29,1       32,5       35,8        39,1        42,3        45,4        48,5          51,5 54,5           57,4        60,3        63,1        65,9        68,6        71,2        73,8        76,3        78,8        81,2        83,5        85,8        88,0        90,2
                           4   0   3,7       7,4       11,0       14,6       18,1       21,6       25,0       28,3       31,6       34,8        38,0        41,1        44,1        47,1          50,0 52,9           55,7        58,5        61,2        63,9        66,5        69,0        71,5        73,9        76,3        78,6        80,8        83,0        85,1        87,2
                           8   0   3,6       7,2       10,7       14,2       17,6       21,0       24,3       27,5       30,7       33,8        36,9        39,9        42,8        45,7          48,5 51,3           54,0        56,7        59,3        61,9        64,4        66,8        69,2        71,5        73,8        76,0        78,1        80,2        82,2        84,2
                          12   0   3,5       7,0       10,4       13,8       17,1       20,4       23,6       26,7       29,8       32,8        35,8        38,7        41,5        44,3          47,0 49,7           52,3        54,9        57,4        59,9        62,3        64,6        66,9        69,1        71,3        73,4        75,4        77,4        79,3        81,2
                          16   0   3,4       6,8       10,1       13,4       16,6       19,8       22,9       25,9       28,9       31,8        34,7        37,5        40,2        42,9          45,5 48,1           50,6        53,1        55,5        57,9        60,2        62,4        64,6        66,7        68,8        70,8        72,7        74,6        76,4        78,2
                          20   0   3,3       6,6        9,8       13,0       16,1       19,2       22,2       25,1       28,0       30,8        33,6        36,3        38,9        41,5          44,0 46,5           48,9        51,3        53,6        55,9        58,1        60,2        62,3        64,3        66,3        68,2        70,0        71,8        73,5        75,2
                          24   0   3,2       6,4        9,5       12,6       15,6       18,6       21,5       24,3       27,1       29,8        32,5        35,1        37,6        40,1          42,5 44,9           47,2        49,5        51,7        53,9        56,0        58,0        60,0        61,9        63,8        65,6        67,3        69,0        70,6        72,2
                          28   0   3,1       6,2        9,2       12,2       15,1       18,0       20,8       23,5       26,2       28,8        31,4        33,9        36,3        38,7          41,0 43,3           45,5        47,7        49,8        51,9        53,9        55,8        57,7        59,5        61,3        63,0        64,6        66,2        67,7        69,2
                          32   0   3,0       6,0        8,9       11,8       14,6       17,4       20,1       22,7       25,3       27,8        30,3        32,7        35,0        37,3          39,5 41,7           43,8        45,9        47,9        49,9        51,8        53,6        55,4        57,1        58,8        60,4        61,9        63,4        64,8        66,2
                          36   0   2,9       5,8        8,6       11,4       14,1       16,8       19,4       21,9       24,4       26,8        29,2        31,5        33,7        35,9          38,0 40,1           42,1        44,1        46,0        47,9        49,7        51,4        53,1        54,7        56,3        57,8        59,2        60,6        61,9        63,2
                          40   0   2,8       5,6        8,3       11,0       13,6       16,2       18,7       21,1       23,5       25,8        28,1        30,3        32,4        34,5          36,5 38,5           40,4        42,3        44,1        45,9        47,6        49,2        50,8        52,3        53,8        55,2        56,5        57,8        59,0        60,2
                          44   0   2,7       5,4        8,0       10,6       13,1       15,6       18,0       20,3       22,6       24,8        27,0        29,1        31,1        33,1          35,0 36,9           38,7        40,5        42,2        43,9        45,5        47,0        48,5        49,9        51,3        52,6        53,8        55,0        56,1        57,2
                          48   0   2,6       5,2        7,7       10,2       12,6       15,0       17,3       19,5       21,7       23,8        25,9        27,9        29,8        31,7          33,5 35,3           37,0        38,7        40,3        41,9        43,4        44,8        46,2        47,5        48,8        50,0        51,1        52,2        53,2        54,2
                          52   0   2,5       5,0        7,4        9,8       12,1       14,4       16,6       18,7       20,8       22,8        24,8        26,7        28,5        30,3          32,0 33,7           35,3        36,9        38,4        39,9        41,3        42,6        43,9        45,1        46,3        47,4        48,4        49,4        50,3        51,2
     Tokens order by
                          56   0   2,4       4,8        7,1        9,4       11,6       13,8       15,9       17,9       19,9       21,8        23,7        25,5        27,2        28,9          30,5 32,1           33,6        35,1        36,5        37,9        39,2        40,4        41,6        42,7        43,8        44,8        45,7        46,6        47,4        48,2
46




       the 4 others
                          60   0   2,3       4,6        6,8        9,0       11,1       13,2       15,2       17,1       19,0       20,8        22,6        24,3        25,9        27,5          29,0 30,5           31,9        33,3        34,6        35,9        37,1        38,2        39,3        40,3        41,3        42,2        43,0        43,8        44,5        45,2
     players of your
                          64   0   2,2       4,4        6,5        8,6       10,6       12,6       14,5       16,3       18,1       19,8        21,5        23,1        24,6        26,1          27,5 28,9           30,2        31,5        32,7        33,9        35,0        36,0        37,0        37,9        38,8        39,6        40,3        41,0        41,6        42,2
          group
                          68   0   2,1       4,2        6,2        8,2       10,1       12,0       13,8       15,5       17,2       18,8        20,4        21,9        23,3        24,7          26,0 27,3           28,5        29,7        30,8        31,9        32,9        33,8        34,7        35,5        36,3        37,0        37,6        38,2        38,7        39,2
                          72   0   2,0       4,0        5,9        7,8        9,6       11,4       13,1       14,7       16,3       17,8        19,3        20,7        22,0        23,3          24,5 25,7           26,8        27,9        28,9        29,9        30,8        31,6        32,4        33,1        33,8        34,4        34,9        35,4        35,8        36,2
                          76   0   1,9       3,8        5,6        7,4        9,1       10,8       12,4       13,9       15,4       16,8        18,2        19,5        20,7        21,9          23,0 24,1           25,1        26,1        27,0        27,9        28,7        29,4        30,1        30,7        31,3        31,8        32,2        32,6        32,9        33,2
                          80   0   1,8       3,6        5,3        7,0        8,6       10,2       11,7       13,1       14,5       15,8        17,1        18,3        19,4        20,5          21,5 22,5           23,4        24,3        25,1        25,9        26,6        27,2        27,8        28,3        28,8        29,2        29,5        29,8        30,0        30,2
                          84   0   1,7       3,4        5,0        6,6        8,1        9,6       11,0       12,3       13,6       14,8        16,0        17,1        18,1        19,1          20,0 20,9           21,7        22,5        23,2        23,9        24,5        25,0        25,5        25,9        26,3        26,6        26,8        27,0        27,1        27,2
                          88   0   1,6       3,2        4,7        6,2        7,6        9,0       10,3       11,5       12,7       13,8        14,9        15,9        16,8        17,7          18,5 19,3           20,0        20,7        21,3        21,9        22,4        22,8        23,2        23,5        23,8        24,0        24,1        24,2        24,2        24,2
                          92   0   1,5       3,0        4,4        5,8        7,1        8,4        9,6       10,7       11,8       12,8        13,8        14,7        15,5        16,3          17,0 17,7           18,3        18,9        19,4        19,9        20,3        20,6        20,9        21,1        21,3        21,4        21,4        21,4        21,3        21,2
                          96   0   1,4       2,8        4,1        5,4        6,6        7,8        8,9        9,9       10,9       11,8        12,7        13,5        14,2        14,9          15,5 16,1           16,6        17,1        17,5        17,9        18,2        18,4        18,6        18,7        18,8        18,8        18,7        18,6        18,4        18,2
                         100   0   1,3       2,6        3,8        5,0        6,1        7,2        8,2        9,1       10,0       10,8        11,6        12,3        12,9        13,5          14,0 14,5           14,9        15,3        15,6        15,9        16,1        16,2        16,3        16,3        16,3        16,2        16,0        15,8        15,5        15,2
                         104   0   1,2       2,4        3,5        4,6        5,6        6,6        7,5        8,3        9,1        9,8        10,5        11,1        11,6        12,1          12,5 12,9           13,2        13,5        13,7        13,9        14,0        14,0        14,0        13,9        13,8        13,6        13,3        13,0        12,6        12,2
                         108   0   1,1       2,2        3,2        4,2        5,1        6,0        6,8        7,5        8,2        8,8         9,4         9,9        10,3        10,7          11,0 11,3           11,5        11,7        11,8        11,9        11,9        11,8        11,7        11,5        11,3        11,0        10,6        10,2         9,7         9,2
                         112   0   1,0       2,0        2,9        3,8        4,6        5,4        6,1        6,7        7,3        7,8         8,3         8,7         9,0         9,3           9,5 9,7             9,8         9,9         9,9         9,9         9,8         9,6         9,4         9,1         8,8         8,4         7,9         7,4         6,8         6,2
                         116   0   0,9       1,8        2,6        3,4        4,1        4,8        5,4        5,9        6,4        6,8         7,2         7,5         7,7         7,9           8,0 8,1             8,1         8,1         8,0         7,9         7,7         7,4         7,1         6,7         6,3         5,8         5,2         4,6         3,9         3,2
                         120   0   0,8       1,6        2,3        3,0        3,6        4,2        4,7        5,1        5,5        5,8         6,1         6,3         6,4         6,5           6,5 6,5             6,4         6,3         6,1         5,9         5,6         5,2         4,8         4,3         3,8         3,2         2,5         1,8         1,0         0,2


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




    Summary of this part This part has 10 periods. At the beginning of the period you are asked
to indicate the amount of tokens you extract.

    At the end of each period, you will be informed about : 1) The total number of tokens
collected by your group 2) The average cost of extraction 3) Of your benefit, the cost of your
extraction and your payoff for this period




                                              47


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




   Part 2
   [Baseline]

   This is exactly the same game as in the previous part.

   As with Part 1, in each period, you and the other four people in your group will have to
decide how many tokens to extract from a common account. The calculation of earnings and the
conversion rate are identical to those in Part 1.

    Similarly, the composition of the groups is identical to that of part 1. So you are in the same
group as before. You also keep your ID of the previous part and this during the 10 periods of
this game.


   Summary of this part

    This part has 10 periods. At the beginning of the period you are asked to indicate the amount
of tokens you extract.

    At the end of each period, you will be informed about : 1) The total number of tokens
collected by your group 2) The average cost of extraction 3) Of your benefit, the cost of your
extraction and your payoff for this period


   [Compulsory]

    However, in this section 2, the withdrawals of all members of your group (you and the other
four members of the group) will be displayed at the end of each period. Example : You are
member A and the other members are B, C, D and E. At the end of each period you will know
the number of tokens extracted by B, C, D and E.

   At the end of each period, you will be informed about : + 4) Individual quantities extracted
by all members of your group.


   [Individual]

    Nevertheless, in this part 2, at each period before making your extraction decision the com-
puter will ask you whether you want to display your extraction of the period or not. Before
making your extraction decision, you will know how many members of your group have decided
to display their decision. At the end of the period the extractions of members who have agreed
to display them will be known to all members of your group.

   Example : You are member A and the other members are B, C, D and E. In period 5 you
decide to display your extraction. Similarly, members C and E decide to display their extractions.
At the beginning of period 5 you will be informed that 3 members of your group (including you)
have decided to display their extractions. At the end of Period 5, withdrawals of A (you), C and
E members will be displayed. On the other hand, the extraction of the members B and D will
not be displayed, it will be written "NA".

   At the end of each period, you will be informed about : + 4) Individual extractions of members


                                                48


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




of your group who have agreed to display them.


   [Majority]

    Nevertheless, in this part 2, at each period before making your extraction decision the compu-
ter will ask you whether you want to display your extraction of the period or not. If the majority
of people in your group, i.e. at least 3 people, accept then all the individual extractions will be
known to all members of your group at the end of the period. Before making your decision to
collect, you will know the result of the vote.

  At the end of each period, you will be informed about : + 4) Individual extraction of all
members of your group if the majority of people wished to display their extractions.


1.A.2    Social Value Orientation estimation

   In this experiment, you have to decide how to share an amont between you and "another
person". This other person is in this room, and will be randomly selected and the end of of the
experiment. You can not identify her and she can not identify you. All your choies are completely
confidential.

    Concretely, you have to select one the between 9 distributions proposed. There are no right or
wrong answers. You have to choose the distribution you prefered. You have to make this choice
15 times through 15 screens that present differents distribution proposal.

   Once all the people present in this room, have answer the question, the computer will ran-
domly select on of the 15 propositions. This will be paied depending of your choice. The part
dedicated to the "other person" will be sent to a subject selected randomly.

   You will also receive the "Other Person" share resulting from the choices of another individual
present in this room who will also be selected randomly at the end of the game.

   The results of this experiment will be communicated to you at the end of the session, and
you will receive at that time the amount corresponding to your winnings.

    In this experiment we used an experimental currency : ECU. The ECU you accumulate during
the experiment will be converted into euros with a conversion rate of 0.01 . One hundred ECU
will therefore correspond to 1 euro.




                                                49


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




1.A.3    Understanding questions in the social information experiment

   1) Including you, your group is composed of :
   — i. 3 people
   — ii. 4 people
   — iii. 5 people
   Answer posted : The correct answer was : 5 people. In your group, there are 4 other players
plus.

    2) Do you change group each period ?
    — i. True
    — ii. False
    Answer posted : The correct answer was : False. You keep the same group during the ten
periods of this game.

   3) Your compensation will depend on the earnings you got during
   — i. of all the periods of a game randomly drawn
   — ii. of a single period randomly drawn on the two parts
   — iii. of all periods of the two parts
   Answer posted : The correct answer was : only one period drawn on the two parts.

   4) Your BENEFIT during a period depends
   — i. Only on your extraction
   — ii. On the extraction of other members of your group
   — iii. On your extraction and the extraction of other members of your group
   Answer posted : The correct answer was : your BENEFIT depends solely on your extraction/

    5) Your Individual Extraction Cost during a period depends
    — i. Only on your extraction
    — ii. On the extraction of other members of your group
    — iii. On your extraction and the extraction of other members of your group
    Answer posted : The correct answer was : your extraction and the extraction of the 4 other
members of your group. Indeed, your individual cost = your extraction level * average cost
of extraction. But the average cost depends on the total extraction of the entire group : your
extraction + that of the other 4 people.

  6) Your PAYOFF during a period depends :
  — i. Only on your extraction
  — ii. Only on the extraction of other members of your group
  — iii. On your extraction and the extraction of other members of your group
  Answer posted : The correct answer was : your extraction and the extraction of the 4 other
members of your group. Your PAYOFF = BENEFIT - Individual Extraction Cost.

  7) You take 14 tokens, the other people in your group also draw 14 tokens each : a) Your
BENEFIT for these extractions decisions is from ?
  — i. 53,8 ECU
  — ii. 14,4 ECU
  Answer posted : The correct answer was : 53.8 ecu. Your benefit is explained in Table 1

   8) You take 14 tokens, the other people in your group also draw 14 tokens each : b) What is

                                             50


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




the total group extraction ?
    — i. 56 Tokens
    — ii. 70 Tokens
    Answer posted : The correct answer was : 70 tokens. That’s 14 * 5 people.

    9) You take 14 tokens, the other people in your group also draw 14 tokens each : c) What is
the total extraction from the 4 other person of your group ?
    — i. 42 Tokens
    — ii. 56 Tokens
    Answer posted : The correct answer was : 56 tokens. 14 * 4 other members of the group.

    10 ) You take 14 tokens, the other people in your group also draw 14 tokens each : d) What is
the average cost of extraction ? Use the formula : (Costof thef irsttoken+Costof thelasttoken)/2
    — i. 1,775=(0,05 + 70*0,05)/2
    — ii. 1,425=(0,05 + 56*0,05)/2
    Answer posted : The correct answer was : 1,775 ecu. This is the average cost for a group
extraction of 70 tokens.

    11 ) You take 14 tokens, the other people in your group also draw 14 tokens each : e) What
is your individual cost of extraction ? Use the cost table :
    — i. 24,9 ECU
    — ii. 30 ECU
    Answer posted : The correct answer was : 24.9 ecu. Indeed, in the table of costs, you have
to look at the line 56 tokens (= taking of the 4 others) and the column 14 tokens (for your
extraction).

    11 ) You take 14 tokens, the other people in your group also draw 14 tokens each : f) What
is your PAYOFF ? Use the Payoff table :
    — i. 28,9 ECU
    — ii. 23.3 ECU
    Answer posted : The correct answer was : 28.9 ecu. Indeed, in the table of the gains, you
have to look at the line 56 tokens (= withdrawal of the 4 others) and the column 14 tokens (for
your extraction).




                                               51


        Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




1.B      Characteristics of Experimental Sessions in the social infor-
         mation experiment

 Table 1.B.1 – Characteristics of expeimental sessions in the social information experiment

      Session Number   Number of Subjects   Number of groups        Treatment   Periods 1-10   Periods 11-20
           4                  20                   4              Baseline        Baseline       Baseline
           6                  15                   3              Baseline        Baseline       Baseline
           12                 20                   4              Baseline        Baseline       Baseline
           2                  15                   3             Individual       Baseline      Individual
           8                  20                   4             Individual       Baseline      Individual
           9                  10                   2             Individual       Baseline      Individual
           14                 15                   3             Individual       Baseline      Individual
           1                  20                   4            Compulsory        Baseline     Compulsory
           7                  15                   3            Compulsory        Baseline     Compulsory
           13                 20                   4            Compulsory        Baseline     Compulsory
           3                  15                   3              Majority        Baseline       Majority
           5                  20                   4              Majority        Baseline       Majority
           10                 20                   4              Majority        Baseline       Majority
           11                 20                   4              Majority        Baseline       Majority




1.C      Description of demographics variables in the social informa-
         tion experiment

    Looking at demographics variables gender, age and social value orientation there are no diffe-
rences between treatments (doing kruskall wallis and chi2 analysis). There are neither differences
between treatments concerning the understanding score (kruskall wallis). However it seem that
a difference appear in the capacity to identify the extraction level socially optimal.

   Presentation of gender by framing.

        Table 1.C.1 – Gender summary statistics in the social information experiment

                                   Treatment           Number of women
                                   Baseline            28(55)
                                   Individual          28(60)
                                   Compulsory          19[40]*
                                   Majority            31(75)


   The chi2 p-value if the statistical description presented in table 1.C.1 is 0.744. In some of the
compulsory treatment the demographics survez were not run correctly. As a consequence we do
not have the results for these data.

          Table 1.C.2 – Age summary statistics in the social information experiment

                                Treatment        Obs        Mean      Std. Dev.
                                Baseline         55         24.91       6.48
                                Individual       60         25.23       7.85
                                Compulsory       40*        24.02       4.42
                                Majority         75         23.80       6.41


                                                       52


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




   The kruskall wallis p-value of the statistical description presented in table 1.C.2 is 0.542.

     Table 1.C.3 – SVO_score summary statistics in the social information experiment

                            Treatment       Obs      Mean   Std. Dev.
                            Baseline        55       0.46     0.16
                            Individual      60       0.44     0.20
                            Compulsory      55       0.47     0.20
                            Majority        75       0.48     0.19


   The kruskall wallis p-value of the statistical description presented in table 1.C.3 is 0.5392.

      Table 1.C.4 – SVO type summary statistics in the social information experiment

                    Treatment       Prosocial     Individualist   Competitive
                    Baseline           30              24             1
                    Individual         29              26             5
                    Compulsory         32              17             6
                    Majority           45              25             5


   The chi2 p-value if the statistical description presented in table 1.C.4 is 0.370.

    The 12 question of the comprehension score were used to compute the understanding score
(the maximum score is 12).

   Table 1.C.5 – Understanding summary statistics in the social information experiment

                            Treatment       Obs      Mean   Std. Dev.
                            Baseline        55       8.71     1.58
                            Individual      60       8.65     1.70
                            Compulsory      55       8.71     1.51
                            Majority        75       8.45     1.66


   The kruskall wallis p-value of the statistical description presented in table 1.C.5 is 0.729.

    Moreover at the end of the experiment, we ask the subjects what would be the extraction
level that if ot had been respected by all the group menbers would have maximize the group
payoffs. The real value is 15.3 due to the way the payoffs are presented we consider the answer
as correct if there were included between [14; 16].

         Table 1.C.6 – Capacity to identify the Pareto Optimum summary statistics

                Treatment       Number of subjects who were able to identify it
                Baseline        28(55)
                Individual      18(60)
                Compulsory      19(55)
                Majority        36(75)


                                                53


       Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context




   The chi2 p-value if the statistical description presented in table 1.C.6 is 0.053*.



1.D     Non parametric tests in the social information experiment

    The Mann Whitney analysis describing the fact that we have significant differences between
treatments since the first period are presented in tables 1.D.1 and 1.D.2. The initial problem
remains.

Table 1.D.1 – Mann Whitney test during the first sequence (Baseline) in the social information
experiment

                               Treatment compared         p-value
                               Baseline Individual         0.518
                               Baseline Compulsory         0.264
                               Baseline Majority          0.024**
                               Individual Compulsory       0.622
                               Individual Majority        0.088*
                               Compulsory Majority         0.169


Table 1.D.2 – Mann Whitney test during the five last periods of the first sequence (Baseline)
in the social information experiment

                                Treatment compared        p-value
                                Baseline Individual        0.975
                                Baseline Compulsory        0.279
                                Baseline Majority          0.139
                                Individual Compulsory      0.356
                                Individual Majority       0.092*
                                Compulsory Majority        0.586


Table 1.D.3 – Mann Whitney test in the second sequence in the social information experiment

                                Treatment compared        p-value
                                Baseline Individual        0.878
                                Baseline Compulsory        0.646
                                Baseline Majority          0.126
                                Individual Compulsory      0.498
                                Individual Majority        0.118
                                Compulsory Majority        0.568



1.E    Details in the voluntary treatments

   Here are presented the details of figures 1.6 and 1.7 in tables 1.E.1 and 1.E.2.


                                               54


           Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



Table 1.E.1 – Percentage of groups displaying their extractions by treatment [number of groups]

  Period                     1           2           3           4           5            6           7           8           9           10
  Majority treatment      86.7 [13]   93.3 [14]   93.3 [14]   100 [15]    86.7 [13]    86.7 [13]   86.7 [13]   93.3 [14]   86.7 [13]   93.3 [14]
  Individual treatment    66.7 [8]     75 [9]      66.7 [8]   66.7 [8]     58.3 [7]    58.3 [7]     75 [9]      50 [6]      58.3 [7]   58.3 [7]




            Table 1.E.2 – Percentage of number of vote in favor of display by treatment

                         Treatment compared               0-1        2-3         4-5      6-7         8-9         10
                         Individual                        20         15         15      8.33        13.33       28.33
                         Majority                         9.33       6.67         8      10.67        28         37.33



1.F        Diff and Diff analysis in the social information experiment

    Voluntary2, Compulsory2 and Majority2 are dummy variables which are equal to 1 whenever
treatment Voluntary Compulsory or Majority were applied in sequence 2.

   The variables seq_Voluntary2, seq_Compulsory2 and seq_Majority2 are dummy variables
which represent the real introduction of the differents treatments.

   We observe that the data of the Voluntary treatment are significantly different from the
Baseline ones and since the beginning of the treatment (Baseline conditions in sequence 1).




                                                                     55


         Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



Table 1.F.1 – Diff and Diff analysis between Baseline and Voluntary treatment (panel tobit estimation, two
sided random effects).

                                 (1)             (2)
                          PrelevementID   PrelevementID
       Voluntary2         -0.274          -0.959
                                          (1.189)
                          (1.260)
        Sequence          1.069∗ ∗ ∗      1.069∗ ∗ ∗
                                          (0.389)
                          (0.389)
    seq_Voluntary2        0.278           0.279
                                          (0.540)
                          (0.540)
      SVO_score                           -14.62∗ ∗ ∗
                                          (3.236)

          Age                             0.0618
                                          (0.0801)

        Gender                            -1.572
                                          (1.150)

 Optimal_Identification                   -1.464
                                          (1.267)

  Understanding_score                     0.422
                                          (0.371)

         _cons            23.58∗ ∗ ∗      26.61∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.911)         (3.749)
        sigma_u
          _cons           6.410∗ ∗ ∗      5.822∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.486)         (0.445)
        sigma_e
         _cons            6.101∗ ∗ ∗      6.101∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.111)         (0.111)
           N              2300            2300
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        56


         Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



Table 1.F.2 – Diff and Diff analysis between Baseline and Compulsory treatment (panel tobit estimation, two
sided random effects).

                                 (1)             (2)
                          PrelevementID   PrelevementID
      Compulsory2         -1.285          -1.141
                                          (1.080)
                          (1.077)
        Sequence          1.064∗ ∗ ∗      1.064∗ ∗ ∗
                                          (0.374)
                          (0.378)
   seq_Compulsory2        0.325           -0.215
                                          (0.570)
                          (0.529)
      SVO_score                           -15.39∗ ∗ ∗
                                          (2.926)

          Age                             -0.0155
                                          (0.0908)

        Gender                            0.153
                                          (1.034)

 Optimal_Identification                   -0.694
                                          (1.086)

  Understanding_score                     0.120
                                          (0.339)

         _cons            23.48∗ ∗ ∗      30.12∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.764)         (3.784)
        sigma_u
          _cons           5.283∗ ∗ ∗      4.740∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.411)         (0.406)
        sigma_e
         _cons            5.945∗ ∗ ∗      5.883∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.108)         (0.115)
           N              2200            1900
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        57


         Chapter 1 : Social information and voluntary display in a common pool context



Table 1.F.3 – Diff and Diff analysis between Baseline and Majority treatment (panel tobit estimation, two
sided random effects).

                                (1)             (2)
                          PrelevementID   PrelevementID
      Majoritaire2        -2.256∗∗        -2.187∗∗
                                          (0.944)
                          (0.983)
        Sequence          1.060∗ ∗ ∗      1.060∗ ∗ ∗
                                          (0.403)
                          (0.403)
     seq_Majority2        0.791           0.792
                                          (0.524)
                          (0.525)
      SVO_score                           -9.018∗ ∗ ∗
                                          (2.483)

          Age                             -0.0232
                                          (0.0694)

        Gender                            -1.063
                                          (0.894)

 Optimal_Identification                   0.0411
                                          (0.923)

  Understanding_score                     -0.191
                                          (0.284)

         _cons            23.55∗ ∗ ∗      30.43∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.749)         (3.223)
        sigma_u
          _cons           5.113∗ ∗ ∗      4.802∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.364)         (0.346)
        sigma_e
         _cons            6.332∗ ∗ ∗      6.332∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.106)         (0.106)
           N              2600            2600
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        58


                                                 Introduction of chapters 2 and 3
                                                                                                 2
This part is based on a joint work with and Katherine Farrow, David Masclet and Marc
Willinger




2.1     Introduction of chapters 2 and 3

     Several public policies aim to encourage individuals or groups to provide public goods (e.g.
public open areas, air and water quality) or preserve existing resources (e.g. biodiversity, fisheries,
forests or groundwater supply). Individuals are asked to create resources in the former, whereas
they are asked to maintain an existing level of resource in the latter. While the actions themselves
differ in these two situations (contributing vs extracting), each decision can be described as a
cooperation decision. Individuals must decide to what extent they contribute or the level of
their extraction. In the next two chapters, we will analyze how the way in which a public game
is framed, i.e. presented while the economic incentives remain unchanged, affects its provision.
Our experiments are based on a voluntary contribution mechanism where subjects make an
investment decision between two accounts. The marginal return of the group account, which
represents the public good, is lower than that of the private account, creating a social dilemma.
The individual interest is not to cooperate, by not investing in the group’s account ; whereas the
collective interest is to obtain a high level of cooperation.

    Experimental evidence has shown that subjects contribute on average between 40 and 60
percent of their endowment in early rounds of a repeated game. This observation contradicts
standard game theory predictions based on selfish rational players. However, contributions decay
with the repetition of the game, almost reaching zero, thus tending to confirm the Nash prediction
(Chaudhuri, 2011). Various mechanisms have been identified to overcome the under-supply of
public goods, and prevent the tendency to free-ride : communication, peer punishment (Ostrom
et al., 1994 ; Fehr & Gächter, 2000) peer pressure (Masclet et al., 2003) and reward (Sefton et al.,
2007). These mechanisms allow subjects to express their disapproval or approval of the actions
of others and thus express their social expectations. Subjects have shown that they are sensitive
to these latter, as they change their behavior by becoming more cooperative. However, little is
known about the robustness of theses mechanisms to contextual changes. In particular, the way
the contribution option is framed, i.e. described ceteris paribus, might affect cooperation among
group members. These two chapters aim to investigate whether the way the voluntary contri-


                                                  59


                                Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




bution mechanism (VCM) is framed, affects the effectiveness of symbolic punishment (chapter
2) or monetary punishment (chapter 3) to promote cooperation among group members. These
two mechanisms allow subjects to express their disagreement towards the actions of their peers.
However, they must be distinguished. Symbolic sanctions are free of charge both for the sender
and for the recipient so that they can be described as "cheap talk". They enable peer pressure. In
contrast, monetary sanctions modify the incentives for gambling, as they are costly for both the
sender and the receiver. Material sanctions enable peer punishment. To sum up, does the way
the collective issue is framed influence the capacity of the group to generate and maintain a high
level of contribution to the public good when symbolic or monetary sanctions can be inflicted ?

    Previous studies have shown that cooperation for providing a public good tends to be higher
than cooperation for maintaining it (Andreoni, 1995 ; Park, 2000 ; Lopez & Nelson, 2005 ; Messer
et al., 2007 ; Gächter et al., 2017). A number of studies attempted to isolate possible framing
effects to explain these findings (Andreoni, 1995 ; Cox, 2015 ; Cubitt et al., 2011a ; Dufwenberg
et al., 2011 ; Fosgaard et al., 2014 ; Fujimoto & Park, 2010 ; Khadjavi & Lange, 2015 ; Park,
2000). One possible reason for the framing effect is that it affects subjects’ perception of the
social dilemma that underlies the VCM and therefore, their willingness to cooperate (ceteris
paribus). Indeed, individuals may perceive that creating resources would generate more positive
externalities than maintaining existing resources. In other words, (failing to) contribute to a
public good may be judged more acceptable (blameworthy) than preserving (exploiting) an
existing public good (see Gächter et al., 2017 ; Cubitt et al., 2011b). According to Andreoni
(1995), the difference is related to the fact that most individuals prefer doing good ("warm
glow") to others than doing bad ("cold prickle"). The strength of the "warm glow" effect is
higher than the "cold-prickle" to induce cooperation.

    In these two chapters, we aim to contribute to the debate regarding the impact of framing
on the effectiveness of peer pressure in chapter 2 and of peer punishment in chapter 3. We add a
new perspective to the existing literature by testing the role of framing as defined by Andreoni
(1995), on the effectiveness of peer pressure and peer punishment. We follow Cartwright (2016),
by considering that the frame created by Andreoni (1995) and the "give and take" frame must
be distinguished by three dimensions : i) the initial allocation of the endowment, ii) the choice
presented to subject and iii) the way the externalities of a subject’s action are characterized.

    In the give (take) frame, the endowment is initially allocated in the private account (in the
public account), and subjects are asked to decide how much they would like to put in (take frame)
the public account. As a result, their action serves to either increase or decrease the amount they
and others obtain from the group account.

    In the positive and negative frames defined by Andreoni (1995), subjects’ initial endowments
are not allocated to one of the two accounts at the beginning of the game. Both in the positive
and the negative framing, individuals are asked to decide the amounts that they want to invest
in each account, under the constraint that the sum of these two amounts must be equal to their
endowment. Andreoni (1995)’s frames differ only with respect to whether the positive or the
negative externality of an individual’s choice is made salient. In the positive frame, the positive
consequences of investing in the group account are highlighted, whereas, in the negative frame,
the negative consequence of investing in the private account is made salient. Unlike in the give
vs take framing, not only the economic consequences of the set of actions are identical, but so
are the possible actions themselves. Experiments based on this framing (Andreoni, 1995 ; Park,
2000 ; Fujimoto & Park, 2010), found that contribution levels are higher in the positive frame
than in the negative one.


                                                60


                                  Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




    Our results on framing effects are fragile since we do not observe the effect described by
Andreoni (1995) in Chapter 2 while we observe it in Chapter 3. It seems essential to present the
global analysis, which takes into account the entire database of framing experiments (combined
symbolic and monetary sanctions). It is the main objective of this introduction. To do so, we
will briefly describe the experimental design and then present our behavioral predictions. Then,
in the third part, we will present the main results of the introduction of symbolic or monetary
sanctions in different framing. In this part, we will try to identify an explanation for the fragility
of the effect of the frame.



2.2     The experimental design

    The experiment is based on a repeated VCM, with and without the possibility of disapproving
the actions of other members of the group, by sending them symbolic or material sanctions. We
rely on a 2x3 factorial design that varies both the framing (positive versus negative) and the
opportunity to send sanctions (symbolic, material or none) to other players. Each of the six
treatments is repeated over 10 periods. Each group played two sequences, one with sanctions
and one without sanctions (except for the Baseline). Half of the groups played first a sequence
without sanctions followed by a sequence with sanctions. The other half of the groups were
exposed to the reverse ordering. We identify the treatment order as follow :

   — Removal condition refers to treatments where symbolic or material sanctions were
     introduced from period 1 to 10 sequence 1 and removed in sequence 2.
   — Introduction condition refers to treatments in which there were no symbolic or material
     sanction in sequence 1, but there were introduced in sequence 2.
   — Baseline refers to treatments where no symbolic or material sanctions were introduced.

   The number of subjects [groups] for each of the six treatments is summarized in table 2.1.

                    Table 2.1 – Numbers of subjects [groups] per treatment

                                               Framing    [groups]
                                    Positive              Negative
                                    Removal 32[8]         Removal 28[7]
                       Symbolic
                                    Introduction 36[9]    Introduction 40[10]
                                    Removal 28[7]         Removal 32[8]
                       Material
                                    Introduction 32[8]    Introduction 36[9]
                       Baseline     28[7]                 32[8]

   The specifics of Andreoni (1995)’s frames will be presented in more detail in the two next
chapters.

   The experiment was conducted in the Montpellier Experimental Economics Laboratory (LEEM)
between May 2018 and November 2019. In total 324 subjects participated in the experiment.

    Upon arrival at the laboratory, each participant chose a booth in which he was seated in
front of a computer terminal. Subjects were informed that the experiment consisted of 3 parts
and that each of the three parts would be paid at the end of the session. They were given specific
instructions at the start of each part. They were invited to read first the instructions in private,


                                                 61


                                Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




after what they were read again aloud by the person administering the experiment.

    The experiment began by eliciting each participant’s social value orientation (SVO), using
Murphy et al. (2011) ’s method. In this task, subjects were asked to make 15 allocation decisions
between themselves and an anonymous receiver. For each decision, 9 options were proposed. One
of the fifteen allocation decisions was randomly selected to be paid at the end of each session.
In order not to influence subjects decisions in the public good game, they were informed of the
results of the SVO task only at the end of the experiment.

    Before starting the experiment, each participant had to answer eight control questions. After
each question, the correct answer and a detailed explanation were displayed. This part aimed
to help participants understand the game and how contributions translated into earnings and
vice versa. The answers to the comprehension questionnaire were used by the experimenter to
compute an understanding score.

    An experimental session lasted approximately one hour and a half. The average payment was
16.01 euros per person in addition to a show-up fee of 2 to 6 euros depending on the distance
travelled by the participant. The experiments were conducted using zTree (Fischbacher, 2007).
The SVO procedure was adapted from Crosetto et al. (2012).



2.3    Behavioral predictions

    We now state our hypotheses concerning the effect of framing on contributions, and, more
importantly, on the disapproval ratings tested. The null hypothesis is that framing does not affect
contribution levels in the experimental treatments without disapproval ratings. We hypothesize
that the frame, i.e. how the collective problem is presented and perceived, can influence subjects’
willingness to cooperate. Allowing subjects to perceive that their choices generate gains or losses
could induce different behaviors (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). The way a situation is presented
can also affect moral judgment about what is acceptable or objectionable behavior (Kahneman,
1992). We consider that the perception created by the frame affects how the subjects qualify the
actions of others. Cubitt et al. (2011b) ’s experiment showed that in a public good using the
give and take frames, acting as a free rider is more strongly condemned in the give frame than in
the take frame. We hypothesize that subjects who perceive others actions as hurting them will
be less cooperative than subjects who perceive others’ actions as doing them good, leading to
prediction 1.

    Prediction 1 : Contributions to the public good are lower under negative framing than under
positive framing.

    If we consider agents as strictly selfishly oriented, they should not pay attention to being
disapproved. Receiving symbolic sanctions should not affect their behavior. Moreover, when
sanctions are costly to send, as in case of monetary sanctions, they should have no incentive
to do so. For this narrow conception of individual utility, the disapproval ratings we are tested
should not have any effects on the willingness to cooperate. Nevertheless, it has been shown
that the opportunity to send disapproval through symbolic (Masclet et al., 2003 ; Dugar, 2010 ;
Dugar, 2013) and material sanctions (Fehr & Gächter, 2000) foster cooperation. According to
Fehr and Fischbacher (2004), the availability of sanctions enables the activation of a social
norm of cooperation. Moreover, Fehr and Schmidt (1999) demonstrate that as soon as there is a


                                                62


                                Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




sufficient proportion of subjects who are inequality averse, the introduction of punishment makes
cooperation possible. It leads us to the second prediction.

    Prediction 2 : The availability of sanctions, both symbolic and material, increases contribu-
tions to the public good.

    Regarding the sanctions’ efficiency, the null hypothesis is that the symbolic or material does
not depend on framing, ceteris paribus. However, in light of previous evidence, framing could
have an impact on their effectiveness. If the negative externalities induced by others’ behavior is
salient, free riding may be the contribution norm, reducing both the willingness to punish and
to contribute. Messer et al. (2013) provide evidence that the efficiency of mechanisms that are
supposed to foster cooperation are lower when the effect of other actions was negatively framed.
With regards to these results, we state the third prediction.

   Prediction 3 : The sanctions are less effective under negative framing than under positive
framing.



2.4    Results

   Result 1 : In the baseline conditions, average groups contributions are slightly
higher under positive framing than under negative framing. However, this effect is
fragile.

    Result 1 is corroborated by the tobit panel estimates presented in tables 2.2 and 2.3. The
dummy variable Framing has a significant positive effect on contributions. However, the framing
effect is not robust when we add control variables : the variable Framing is no longer significant.
Furthermore, it is not significant in the Introduction conditions (see table 2.3). It is mainly due
to the fact that under these conditions, we observe an inverse effect of the frame between symbo-
lic and monetary sanctions. The contributions are higher in the positive frame when monetary
sanctions are introduced, whereas they are higher in the negative frame for symbolic sanctions.
The higher cooperation in the negative frame is only observed under the latter conditions (In-
troduction conditions with symbolic sanctions). For all other conditions, we observe a higher
contribution in the positive frame than in the negative frame (as shown in figures 2.1 and 2.2).




                                                63


                                                  Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




                               20
                    Tokens in group account
                     5         10
                               0        15




                                              0             5                        10               15                          20
                                                                                    Period
                                                   Positive Framing Baseline                 Negative Framing Baseline

                                                   Positive Framing Monetary Sanction        Negative Framing Monetary Sanction

                                                   Positive Framing Symbolic Sanction        Negative Framing Symbolic Sanction




Figure 2.1 – Evolution of the average group contribution in Introduction condition for all framing data.
                               15
                    Tokens in group account
                       5       0    10




                                              0             5                        10               15                          20
                                                                                    Period
                                                   Positive Framing Baseline                 Negative Framing Baseline

                                                   Positive Framing Monetary Sanction        Negative Framing Monetary Sanction

                                                   Positive Framing Symbolic Sanction        Negative Framing Symbolic Sanction




 Figure 2.2 – Evolution of the average group contribution in Removal condition for all framing data.




                                                                                 64


                                          Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.2 – Individual contributions to the group account for all framing data (panel tobit estimation two
sided, random effects).

                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)                (4)
                                                All data   All data     All data       Without sanction
                          Framing                2.610∗ ∗ ∗ 2.062∗∗      1.528              2.480∗∗
                                                (1.011)     (1.026)     (1.040)            (1.157)

                          Symbolic sanctions     4.994∗ ∗ ∗ 5.855∗ ∗ ∗ 5.860∗ ∗ ∗
                                                (0.428)     (0.599)    (0.597)

                          Material sanctions     11.58∗ ∗ ∗ 9.434∗ ∗ ∗ 9.479∗ ∗ ∗
                                                (0.444)     (0.590)    (0.589)

                          Period                 -0.409∗ ∗ ∗ -0.408∗ ∗ ∗ -0.408∗ ∗ ∗        -0.728∗ ∗ ∗
                                                (0.0247)    (0.0246)    (0.0246)           (0.0414)

                          Symbolic × Framing                 -1.766∗∗    -1.734∗∗
                                                            (0.846)     (0.844)

                          Material × Framing                 4.686∗ ∗ ∗ 4.707∗ ∗ ∗
                                                            (0.875)     (0.873)

                          SVO_score                                      12.62∗ ∗ ∗         14.43∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                        (2.530)            (2.908)

                          Gender                                         2.074∗∗            2.113∗
                                                                        (0.951)            (1.092)

                          Age                                            -0.151            -0.0552
                                                                        (0.129)            (0.149)

                          Understanding                                  0.725∗∗           0.0318
                                                                        (0.335)            (0.384)

                          _cons                  6.705∗ ∗ ∗ 6.985∗ ∗ ∗ -0.481               3.094
                                                (0.752)     (0.749)    (3.815)             (4.412)
                          sigma_u
                          _cons                  8.717∗ ∗ ∗ 8.553∗ ∗ ∗ 8.084∗ ∗ ∗           9.112∗ ∗ ∗
                                                (0.393)     (0.388)    (0.370)             (0.459)
                          sigma_e
                          _cons                  10.06∗ ∗ ∗ 10.03∗ ∗ ∗ 10.03∗ ∗ ∗           9.337∗ ∗ ∗
                                                (0.145)     (0.145)    (0.145)             (0.178)
                          N                      6480        6480       6480                3840
                          Standard errors in parentheses
                          * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                            65


                                            Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.3 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
tions for all framing data (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                            (1)               (2)               (3)                  (4)                  (5)                   (6)
                       Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl     Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
  Framing                  3.824∗ ∗ ∗        4.143∗ ∗ ∗        4.249∗ ∗ ∗           1.674                0.611                -0.440
                          (1.423)           (1.459)           (1.469)              (1.162)              (1.125)              (1.141)

  Symbolic sanction        1.579∗∗           1.506             1.568               8.362∗ ∗ ∗           9.764∗ ∗ ∗           9.829∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.769)           (1.016)           (1.015)             (0.689)              (0.850)              (0.845)

  Material sanction        6.511∗ ∗ ∗        7.409∗ ∗ ∗        7.513∗ ∗ ∗          16.30∗ ∗ ∗           11.59∗ ∗ ∗           11.72∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.760)           (0.957)           (0.955)             (0.730)              (0.873)              (0.869)

  Period                   -0.608∗ ∗ ∗       -0.609∗ ∗ ∗       -0.604∗ ∗ ∗         -0.654∗ ∗ ∗          -0.646∗ ∗ ∗          -0.652∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.0450)          (0.0450)          (0.0450)            (0.0437)             (0.0431)             (0.0431)

  Symbolic × Framing                         0.130             0.175                                    -3.152∗ ∗ ∗          -3.113∗ ∗ ∗
                                            (1.272)           (1.269)                                  (1.071)              (1.066)

  Material × Framing                         -1.939            -1.870                                   10.43∗ ∗ ∗           10.40∗ ∗ ∗
                                            (1.247)           (1.245)                                  (1.163)              (1.157)

  SVO_score                                                    14.61∗ ∗ ∗                                                    14.35∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (3.598)                                                       (2.783)

  Gender                                                       0.957                                                         2.944∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (1.381)                                                       (1.022)

  Age                                                         -0.0622                                                        -0.227
                                                              (0.179)                                                       (0.152)

  Understanding                                                0.368                                                         0.713∗
                                                              (0.459)                                                       (0.386)

  _cons                    8.755∗ ∗ ∗        8.599∗ ∗ ∗        0.299               8.988∗ ∗ ∗           9.495∗ ∗ ∗           2.518
                          (1.171)           (1.183)           (5.320)             (0.862)              (0.825)              (4.508)
  sigma_u
  _cons                    9.182∗ ∗ ∗        9.191∗ ∗ ∗        8.712∗ ∗ ∗          7.902∗ ∗ ∗           7.379∗ ∗ ∗           6.726∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.559)           (0.560)           (0.535)             (0.449)              (0.428)              (0.397)
  sigma_e
  _cons                    9.703∗ ∗ ∗        9.701∗ ∗ ∗        9.703∗ ∗ ∗          9.843∗ ∗ ∗           9.734∗ ∗ ∗           9.733∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.191)           (0.191)           (0.191)             (0.174)              (0.172)              (0.172)
  N                        3600              3600              3600                4080                 4080                 4080
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




    Overall, our results partly replicate Andreoni (1995) ’s result. However, the framing effect
lacks robustness and is not always observed. This fragility of the framing effect is nevertheless
also observed in experiments that replicate the give and take frame. Indeed, if most of the studies
find a higher contribution in the give frame, there are some exceptions such as Fosgaard et al.
(2014), which has a pool of 2 042 subjects and finds a higher contribution in the Take frame.
Sell and Son (1997) and Sell et al. (2002) also find a higher contribution in the take frame,
even if the difference is not significant in Sell and Son (1997). Cox et al. (2013) find similar
contribution level in the give and take frames. Moreover, even in experiments where contributions
are higher under the give frame, it is not always statistically significant. Cox (2015) find that
the framing effect is stronger for men than for women. Dufwenberg (2011) who is adding a label
dimension to the give and take frame, adding a community name to the experiment or not, only
finds a significant difference between the treatment Give frame without label and Take frame
with the Community label. Cubitt (2010a), who introduces monetary sanctions in a "Give and
Take" framing, observes stronger contributions in the give than in the take frame. However, the
difference is only significant between "Give" with punishment and "Take" without punishment.
Cartwright and Ramaligam (2019) tried to disentangle the effect of give and take frame for
the frame created by Andreoni (1995) and found no significant difference in the aggregated
contributions and though for both kind of frames.

    In our experiment, the lack of robustness is partly due to three groups in the treatment
symbolic sanctions with negative framing, which have a significantly higher contribution than
others. This effect is illustrated by the diff and diff analysis presented in table 2.4. The variable
called "Groups where symbolic sanctions are introduced" refers to a dummy which is equal to

                                                                   66


                                    Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




1 whenever symbolic sanction are introduced in sequence 2. The positive and significant sign
of this variable shows that, in this treatment, groups make significantly higher contributions
than others groups in the same conditions since the beginning of the repeated game (i.e. in
the baseline conditions where there is no mechanism to foster cooperation). Moreover, if we
remove these 3 groups from the database, the variable "Groups where symbolic sanctions are
introduced " is no more significant (cf appendix 2.C.3). This element implies that without these 3
groups, the groups constituting the symbolic sanctions treatment under Introduction condition
for the negative framing are not different from the groups constituting the negative framing
sample.

     In addition, another explanation of the fragility of the framing is that it depends on inherent
group capacities to cooperate. In order to take into account the specific initial capacity of the
group to cooperate, we integrate the initial contribution of the group into the regression. We
assume that a subject’s initial contribution reflects his or her willingness to cooperate. In this
first period, subjects respond to their beliefs, or to what they think should be done, without
changing their behavior in response to the actions of others. There is no reciprocity effect in this
first stage. As a consequence, we assume that the sum of contributions at the first period of the
game reflects the group’s inherent capacity to cooperate 1 . This variable, called "Initial group
contribution" is positively and significantly correlated with individual contribution dynamic.
Although the effect is relatively weak, it reinforce the framing effect (cf appendix 2.C.1 and
2.C.2). We conclude that the effect of framing is dependent on groups’ initial willingness to
cooperate.
   1. A similar hypothesis was formulated by Dugar (2010). They analyzed the effect of the first-period minimum
on the group’s contribution and the effect of the disapproval and approval ratings.




                                                      67


                                      Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.4 – Diff and Diff analysis in the negative framing Introduction condition for symbolic sanctions (panel
tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                                                                        (1)           (2)
                                                                        pbl           pbl
                 Groups where symbolic sanctions are introduced   5.759∗ ∗ ∗    5.767∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (2.095)
                                                                  (2.211)
                                    Sequence                      -4.024∗ ∗ ∗   -4.030∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (1.009)
                                                                  (1.010)
                               Symbolic sanctions                 6.978∗ ∗ ∗    6.986∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (1.336)
                                                                  (1.337)
                                   SVO_score                                    13.68∗∗
                                                                                (5.412)

                                     Gender                                     3.167
                                                                                (1.991)

                                      Age                                       -0.132
                                                                                (0.295)

                                 Understanding                                  1.106
                                                                                (0.834)

                                     _cons                        3.428∗∗       -8.021
                                                                  (1.654)       (8.850)
                                    sigma_u
                                      _cons                       8.420∗ ∗ ∗    7.801∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.830)       (0.780)
                                    sigma_e
                                     _cons                        11.24∗ ∗ ∗    11.23∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.353)       (0.353)
                                       N                          1440          1440
                 t statistics in parentheses
                 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




    Finally, experiments that replicated Andreoni (1995) ’s frame also found that subjects charac-
teristics influence the effect. Park (2000) found a significant difference between the two framing
conditions in overall contribution rates. However, he did not find a significant effect on some
of the subjects with a cooperative social orientation. Our results confirm that the social value
orientation is a strong determinant of the willingness to cooperate in collective actions issues.
Indeed, the social orientation score has a high positive and significant effect on the contribution
to the public good, as it is illustrated in tables 2.2 and 2.3. The stronger their preference for equal
sharing, the larger their contribution to the public good. The different effect of framing according
to the type of subject will be discussed more in detail in the conclusion of these two chapters.
Additionally, Fujimoto and Park (2010) found that men mostly generate the lower contribution
in the negative frame. Our results partly confirm this fact. Women seem to contribute more to
the public good. This observation is supported by the variable Gender, which has a positive and
significant in the global analysis (see table 2.2 column 3). It should be noted that this effect is
mainly observed under the Introduction condition.

   It is worth noticing that the three groups that have a significantly higher contribution than
others are not characterized by a higher proportion of men or of prosocial subjects, which could
have been an alternative reason for these differences (cf appendix 2.B.1).

   Result 2 : The availability of symbolic or monetary sanctions significantly in-
creases contributions.

                                                        68


                                 Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




   Result 2 is supported by the significant and positive sign of the variables symbolic and
material sanctions presented in table 2.3.

    Nevertheless, it should be noted that for both symbolic and monetary sanctions, their effect
is stronger in the Introduction condition. It implies that once subjects have gone through a
sequence in which they have not been able to express their disapproval. For symbolic sanctions,
their effects are even absent if only the Removal Condition is considered.

   Result 3 : The lower effectiveness of disapproval ratings in the negative frame is
only observed for monetary sanctions in the Introduction condition.

    Result 3 is supported by the significant and positive sign of the interaction variable Material
×Framing. It reflects the fact that monetary sanctions are most effective in the context of positive
framing. In this context, they lead the majority of groups to contribute fully until the last period
of the experiment. Conversely, the increase in contributions is relatively smaller in the negative
framing where, on average, groups increase their contributions up to half of their endowment
(see figure 2.1).

    However, it should be noted that in this Introduction condition, the interaction variable
Symbolic × framing has a reverse effect as predicted. At odds with Messer et al. (2013) ’s
findings, the symbolic sanctions are more efficient under the negative frame. We hypothesize
that the groups composing the negative framing under Introduction conditions have a greater
willingness to cooperate ; that is why they are more sensitive to the introduction of symbolic
sanctions. Those results will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 2.

   This contradictory effect between symbolic and monetary sanctions annihilates the effect of
framing under the Introduction condition.

    The two chapters that follow will present the specific effect of the frame on i) symbolic
(chapter 2) and ii) monetary sanctions (chapter 3). As these results seem contradictory, we will
explain the effects of each dataset with more details. Lastly, we will discuss the global effect of
the frame on the disapproval ratings studied, and we will try to go further in the explanation of
its main drivers.




                                                69


                              Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




References

   ANDREONI, J. 1995. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : the effects of positive and negative
framing on cooperation in experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1-21.

    CARTWRIGHT, E. 2016. A comment on framing effects in linear public good games. Journal
of the Economic Science Association, 2, 73-84.

   CARTWRIGHT, E. & RAMALINGAM, A. 2019. Framing effects in public good games :
Choices or externalities ? Economics Letters, 179, 42-45.

    CHAUDHURI, A. 2011. Sustaining cooperation in laboratory public goods experiments : a
selective survey of the literature. Experimental Economics, 14, 47-83.

   COX, C. A. 2015. Decomposing the effects of negative framing in linear public goods games.
Economics Letters, 126, 63-65.

    COX, J. C., OSTROM, E., SADIRAJ, V. & WALKER, J. M. 2013. Provision versus appro-
priation in symmetric and asymmetric social dilemmas. Southern Economic Journal, 79, 496-512.

    CROSETTO, P., WEISEL, O. & WINTER, F. 2012. A flexible z-Tree implementation of the
social value orientation slider measure (Murphy et al. 2011)–manual. Jena Economic Research
Paper, 62.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M. & GÄCHTER, S. 2011a. Framing and free riding : emo-
tional responses and punishment in social dilemma games. Experimental Economics, 14, 254-272.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M., GÄCHTER, S. & KABALIN, R. 2011b. Moral judgments
in social dilemmas : How bad is free riding ? Journal of Public Economics, 95, 253-264.

   DUFWENBERG, M., GÄCHTER, S. & HENNIG-SCHMIDT, H. 2011. The framing of games
and the psychology of play. Games and Economic Behavior, 73, 459-478.

   DUGAR, S. 2010. Nonmonetary sanctions and rewards in an experimental coordination game.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 73, 377-386.

   DUGAR, S. 2013. Non-monetary incentives and opportunistic behavior : Evidence from a
laboratory public good game. Economic Inquiry, 51, 1374-1388.

   FEHR, E. & FISCHBACHER, U. 2004. Social norms and human cooperation. Trends in
cognitive sciences, 8, 185-190.

   FEHR, E. & GÄCHTER, S. 2000. Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Experi-
ments. The American Economic Review, 90, 980-994.

   FEHR, E. & SCHMIDT, K. M. 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
Quarterly journal of Economics, 817-868.

   FISCHBACHER, U. 2007. z-Tree : Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments.
Experimental economics, 10, 171-178.

                                             70


                               Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




    FOSGAARD, T. R., HANSEN, L. G. & WENGSTRÖM, E. 2014. Understanding the nature
of cooperation variability. Journal of Public Economics, 120, 134-143.

   FUJIMOTO, H. & PARK, E.-S. 2010. Framing effects and gender differences in voluntary
public goods provision experiments. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 39, 455-457.

    GÄCHTER, S., KOELLE, F. & QUERCIA, S. 2017. Reciprocity and the tragedies of main-
taining and providing the commons Nature Human Behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9),
650-656.

   KAHNEMAN, D. 1992. Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed feelings. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51, 296-312.

    KHADJAVI, M. & LANGE, A. 2015. Doing good or doing harm : experimental evidence on
giving and taking in public good games. Experimental Economics, 18, 432-441.

   MASCLET, D., NOUSSAIR, C., TUCKER, S. & VILLEVAL, M.-C. 2003. Monetary and
nonmonetary punishment in the voluntary contributions mechanism. The American Economic
Review, 93, 366-380.

    MESSER, K. D., SUTER, J. F. & YAN, J. 2013. Context effects in a negatively framed social
dilemma experiment. Environmental and Resource Economics, 55, 387-405.

    MESSER, K. D., ZARGHAMEE, H., KAISER, H. M. & SCHULZE, W. D. 2007. New hope
for the voluntary contributions mechanism : The effects of context. Journal of Public Economics,
91, 1783-1799.

   OSTROM, E., GARDNER, R. & WALKER, J. 1994. Rules, games, and common-pool re-
sources, University of Michigan Press.

    PARK, E.-S. 2000. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : a further experimental study of framing
effects on free-riding. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 43, 405-421.

   SEFTON, M., SHUPP, R. & WALKER, J. M. 2007. The effect of rewards and sanctions in
provision of public goods. Economic inquiry, 45, 671-690.

    SELL, J., CHEN, Z.-Y., HUNTER-HOLMES, P. & JOHANSSON, A. C. 2002. A Cross-
Cultural Comparison of Public Good and Resource Good Settings. Social Psychology Quarterly,
65, 285-297.

   SELL, J. & SON, Y. 1997. Comparing Public Goods with Common Pool Resources : Three
Experiments. Social Psychology Quarterly, 60, 118-137.

   TVERSKY, A. & KAHNEMAN, D. 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science, 211, 453-458.

   WILLINGER, M. & ZIEGELMEYER, A. 1999. Framing and cooperation in public good
games : an experiment with an interior solution. Economics letters, 65, 323-328.




                                              71


Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




              72


                       Appendices of the Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




2.A       Robustness check

    As a robustness, we also made panel analysis of the contribution including clusters by groups.

Table 2.A.1 – Individual contributions to the group account for all framing data (panel regression random
effects with cluster by group).

                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)                (4)
                                               All data    All data    All data       Without sanction
                          Framing               1.638∗      1.359       1.056              1.404∗
                                               (0.842)     (0.842)     (0.823)            (0.839)

                          Symbolic sanctions    2.566∗ ∗ ∗ 3.100∗ ∗ ∗ 3.097∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.488)     (0.720)    (0.719)

                          Material sanctions    6.299∗ ∗ ∗ 5.104∗ ∗ ∗ 5.129∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.798)     (1.020)    (1.023)

                          Period                -0.218∗ ∗ ∗ -0.219∗ ∗ ∗ -0.219∗ ∗ ∗        -0.375∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.0338)    (0.0333)    (0.0333)           (0.0421)

                          Symbolic × Framing                -1.066      -1.042
                                                           (0.971)     (0.973)

                          Material × Framing                2.552       2.552∗
                                                           (1.555)     (1.548)

                          SVO_score                                     5.926∗ ∗ ∗         6.023∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                       (1.402)            (1.561)

                          Gender                                        0.975∗∗            0.724
                                                                       (0.438)            (0.488)

                          Age                                           -0.0758            -0.0376
                                                                       (0.0602)           (0.0589)

                          Understanding                                 0.386∗∗           0.0696
                                                                       (0.182)            (0.173)

                          _cons                 8.079∗ ∗ ∗ 8.224∗ ∗ ∗ 4.599∗∗              7.012∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.626)     (0.633)    (2.065)             (2.138)
                          N                     6480        6480       6480                3840
                          R2                    0.135       0.151      0.180               0.100
                          t statistics in parentheses
                          * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                           73


                                          Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.A.2 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction
conditions for all framing data (panel regression random effects with cluster by group).

                            (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                       Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
  Framing                  2.264∗∗          2.364∗∗          2.345∗∗             1.201                0.657               0.0601
                          (1.109)          (1.161)          (1.114)             (0.965)              (0.916)              (0.885)

  Symbolic sanctions       0.624            0.609            0.632              4.562∗ ∗ ∗           5.465∗ ∗ ∗           5.485∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.595)          (0.550)          (0.546)            (0.890)              (1.180)              (1.178)

  Material sanctions       3.817∗ ∗ ∗       4.110∗ ∗ ∗       4.155∗ ∗ ∗         8.849∗ ∗ ∗           6.289∗ ∗ ∗           6.377∗ ∗ ∗
                          (1.011)          (1.256)          (1.256)            (1.226)              (1.638)              (1.655)

  Period                  -0.329∗ ∗ ∗      -0.330∗ ∗ ∗      -0.327∗ ∗ ∗         -0.353∗ ∗ ∗          -0.352∗ ∗ ∗          -0.355∗ ∗ ∗
                         (0.0453)         (0.0453)         (0.0454)            (0.0501)             (0.0503)             (0.0503)

  Symbolic × Framing                       0.0264           0.0536                                   -1.919               -1.871
                                           (0.898)          (0.890)                                 (1.466)              (1.480)

  Material × Framing                        -0.631           -0.599                                  5.411∗ ∗ ∗           5.369∗ ∗ ∗
                                           (1.921)          (1.915)                                 (1.951)              (1.960)

  SVO_score                                                  6.331∗ ∗ ∗                                                   7.318∗ ∗ ∗
                                                            (1.962)                                                      (1.611)

  Gender                                                     0.343                                                        1.444∗ ∗ ∗
                                                            (0.554)                                                      (0.559)

  Age                                                       -0.0231                                                       -0.123∗
                                                           (0.0792)                                                      (0.0680)

  Understanding                                              0.212                                                        0.411∗
                                                            (0.208)                                                      (0.212)

  _cons                    9.272∗ ∗ ∗       9.223∗ ∗ ∗       5.306∗             9.207∗ ∗ ∗           9.461∗ ∗ ∗           5.849∗∗
                          (0.780)          (0.788)          (2.763)            (0.797)              (0.789)              (2.482)
  N                        3600             3600             3600               4080                 4080                 4080
  R2                       0.167            0.167            0.194              0.122                0.173                0.214
  t statistics in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




2.B         Analysis including groups’ initial contribution

    In order to take into account the groups’ initial capacity to cooperate, we integrate the
initial contribution of the group into the regression. This variable is called "Initial contribution",
is significantly correlated with the individual contribution. While the effect of this variable is
relatively small, its introduction reinforces the treatment effect.




                                                                74


                                        Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.B.1 – Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group for all framing
data (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects, first period excluded)).

                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)                (4)
                                                    All data   All data     All data       Without sanction
                       Framing                       3.175∗ ∗ ∗ 2.500∗∗      2.168∗∗            3.133∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.964)     (0.986)     (1.010)            (1.086)

                       Symbolic sanctions            5.096∗ ∗ ∗ 5.790∗ ∗ ∗ 5.794∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.436)     (0.609)    (0.608)

                       Material sanctions            11.98∗ ∗ ∗ 9.748∗ ∗ ∗ 9.795∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.455)     (0.602)    (0.601)

                       Period                        -0.391∗ ∗ ∗ -0.390∗ ∗ ∗ -0.390∗ ∗ ∗        -0.706∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.0266)    (0.0265)    (0.0265)           (0.0442)

                       Initial group contribution     0.198∗ ∗ ∗ 0.189∗ ∗ ∗ 0.173∗ ∗ ∗           0.207∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.0292)    (0.0289)   (0.0280)            (0.0313)

                       Symbolic × Framing                        -1.442∗     -1.415
                                                                (0.864)     (0.862)

                       Material × Framing                        4.909∗ ∗ ∗ 4.919∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                (0.895)     (0.893)

                       SVO_score                                             11.15∗ ∗ ∗         12.57∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                            (2.453)            (2.735)

                       Gender                                                1.893∗∗            1.870∗
                                                                            (0.918)            (1.022)

                       Age                                                   -0.182             -0.104
                                                                            (0.125)            (0.139)

                       Understanding                                         0.481              -0.296
                                                                            (0.325)            (0.362)

                       _cons                         -2.695∗     -1.940      -5.920             -2.702
                                                    (1.509)     (1.494)     (3.780)            (4.226)
                       sigma_u
                       _cons                         8.247∗ ∗ ∗ 8.128∗ ∗ ∗ 7.751∗ ∗ ∗           8.420∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.379)     (0.375)    (0.360)             (0.433)
                       sigma_e
                       _cons                         9.997∗ ∗ ∗ 9.964∗ ∗ ∗ 9.965∗ ∗ ∗           9.296∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.149)     (0.148)    (0.148)             (0.183)
                       N                             6156        6156       6156                3636
                       Standard errors in parentheses
                       * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                               75


                                                 Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.B.2 – Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group, discriminating
for Removal and Introduction conditions, all framing data (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects, first
period excluded).

                                    (1)               (2)              (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                               Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl     Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
  Framing                          3.617∗ ∗ ∗        3.622∗∗          3.816∗ ∗ ∗           2.104∗∗              0.991                0.411
                                  (1.391)           (1.426)          (1.444)              (1.069)              (1.058)              (1.095)

  Symbolic sanctions               1.635∗∗           1.086            1.139               8.142∗ ∗ ∗           9.516∗ ∗ ∗           9.585∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.785)           (1.036)          (1.035)             (0.698)              (0.861)              (0.856)

  Material sanctions               7.107∗ ∗ ∗        7.606∗ ∗ ∗       7.699∗ ∗ ∗          16.09∗ ∗ ∗           11.52∗ ∗ ∗           11.65∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.778)           (0.976)          (0.974)             (0.739)              (0.886)              (0.882)

  Period                           -0.597∗ ∗ ∗      -0.597∗ ∗ ∗       -0.592∗ ∗ ∗         -0.607∗ ∗ ∗          -0.599∗ ∗ ∗          -0.605∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.0483)         (0.0483)          (0.0483)            (0.0466)             (0.0460)             (0.0460)

  Initial group contribution        0.236∗ ∗ ∗      0.236∗ ∗ ∗         0.217∗ ∗ ∗          0.183∗ ∗ ∗           0.157∗ ∗ ∗          0.136∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.0520)         (0.0521)          (0.0502)            (0.0303)             (0.0290)             (0.0283)

  Symbolic × Framing                                 1.051            1.088                                    -3.113∗ ∗ ∗          -3.081∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (1.302)          (1.300)                                  (1.091)              (1.086)

  Material × Framing                                 -1.095           -1.031                                   10.08∗ ∗ ∗           10.07∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (1.280)          (1.279)                                  (1.180)              (1.175)

  SVO_score                                                           13.47∗ ∗ ∗                                                    11.55∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (3.538)                                                       (2.686)

  Gender                                                              0.772                                                         2.386∗∗
                                                                     (1.355)                                                       (0.972)

  Age                                                                -0.0200                                                        -0.309∗∗
                                                                     (0.176)                                                       (0.144)

  Understanding                                                       0.280                                                         0.323
                                                                     (0.451)                                                       (0.373)

  _cons                            -2.383            -2.395           -9.691∗             0.486                2.148                1.580
                                  (2.649)           (2.651)          (5.669)             (1.541)              (1.479)              (4.276)
  sigma_u
  _cons                            8.910∗ ∗ ∗        8.915∗ ∗ ∗       8.509∗ ∗ ∗          7.181∗ ∗ ∗           6.796∗ ∗ ∗           6.297∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.547)           (0.548)          (0.527)             (0.420)              (0.403)              (0.379)
  sigma_e
  _cons                            9.619∗ ∗ ∗        9.618∗ ∗ ∗       9.620∗ ∗ ∗          9.806∗ ∗ ∗           9.698∗ ∗ ∗           9.698∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.196)           (0.196)          (0.196)             (0.179)              (0.177)              (0.177)
  N                                3420              3420             3420                3876                 3876                 3876
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                       76


                                        Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.B.3 – Individual contributions to the group account, all framing data (panel regression random effects
with cluster by group, first period excluded).

                                                      (1)        (2)          (3)                (4)
                                                    All data   All data    All data       Without sanction
                       Framing                       1.920∗ ∗ ∗ 1.598∗∗     1.419∗             1.793∗∗
                                                     (2.59)     (2.17)      (1.92)             (2.41)

                       Symbolic sanctions            2.604∗ ∗ ∗ 3.051∗ ∗ ∗ 3.047∗ ∗ ∗
                                                     (5.20)     (4.07)     (4.07)

                       Material sanctions            6.482∗ ∗ ∗ 5.293∗ ∗ ∗ 5.318∗ ∗ ∗
                                                     (8.15)     (5.07)     (5.07)

                       Period                       -0.204∗ ∗ ∗ -0.205∗ ∗ ∗ -0.205∗ ∗ ∗       -0.359∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (-5.72)     (-5.84)     (-5.84)           (-8.36)

                       Initial group contribution    0.114∗ ∗ ∗ 0.108∗ ∗ ∗ 0.101∗ ∗ ∗          0.115∗ ∗ ∗
                                                     (5.29)     (4.99)     (4.78)              (5.54)

                       Symbolic × Framing                       -0.893     -0.872
                                                                (-0.88)    (-0.86)

                       Material × Framing                       2.541       2.539
                                                                (1.64)      (1.64)

                       SVO_score                                            5.003∗ ∗ ∗         4.979∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                            (3.78)             (3.34)

                       Gender                                               0.866∗∗            0.618
                                                                            (2.06)             (1.37)

                       Age                                                 -0.0928            -0.0592
                                                                           (-1.53)            (-1.05)

                       Understanding                                        0.241             -0.0928
                                                                            (1.41)            (-0.56)

                       _cons                         2.657∗∗    3.060∗∗     1.390              3.433 ∗
                                                     (2.58)     (2.88)      (0.67)             (1.77)
                       N                              6156       6156        6156               3636
                       R2                            0.196      0.207       0.228              0.143
                       t statistics in parentheses
                       * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                               77


                                                Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.B.4 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction
conditions, all framing data (panel regression random effects with cluster by group, first period excluded).

                                    (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                               Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
  Framing                          2.122∗∗          2.100∗           2.129∗∗             1.457∗               0.891                0.597
                                  (1.018)          (1.080)          (1.042)             (0.773)              (0.718)              (0.731)

  Symbolic sanctions               0.652            0.403            0.420              4.440∗ ∗ ∗           5.299∗ ∗ ∗           5.322∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.591)          (0.546)          (0.544)            (0.890)              (1.202)              (1.195)

  Material sanctions               4.117∗ ∗ ∗       4.272∗ ∗ ∗       4.311∗ ∗ ∗         8.734∗ ∗ ∗           6.308∗ ∗ ∗           6.379∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (1.015)          (1.327)          (1.330)            (1.217)              (1.652)              (1.668)

  Period                          -0.318∗ ∗ ∗      -0.318∗ ∗ ∗      -0.316∗ ∗ ∗         -0.325∗ ∗ ∗          -0.325∗ ∗ ∗          -0.327∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.0471)         (0.0471)         (0.0472)            (0.0522)             (0.0523)             (0.0523)

  Initial group contribution       0.120∗ ∗ ∗      0.121∗ ∗ ∗        0.113∗ ∗ ∗          0.113∗ ∗ ∗          0.0985∗ ∗ ∗          0.0891∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.0345)         (0.0342)         (0.0340)            (0.0250)             (0.0244)             (0.0232)

  Symbolic × Framing                                0.468            0.491                                   -1.825               -1.795
                                                   (0.934)          (0.925)                                 (1.530)              (1.531)

  Material × Framing                                -0.331           -0.304                                  5.140∗∗              5.125∗∗
                                                   (1.922)          (1.921)                                 (1.997)              (2.007)

  SVO_score                                                          5.682∗ ∗ ∗                                                   5.507∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (1.862)                                                      (1.574)

  Gender                                                             0.221                                                        1.108∗∗
                                                                    (0.558)                                                      (0.520)

  Age                                                              -0.000303                                                      -0.175∗∗
                                                                    (0.0764)                                                     (0.0679)

  Understanding                                                      0.159                                                        0.167
                                                                    (0.204)                                                      (0.207)

  _cons                            3.515∗∗          3.513∗∗         0.0873              3.952∗ ∗ ∗           4.845∗ ∗ ∗           5.127∗∗
                                  (1.744)          (1.760)          (2.920)            (1.020)              (1.035)              (2.350)
  N                                3420             3420             3420               3876                 3876                 3876
  R2                               0.207            0.207            0.228              0.193                0.228                0.255
  t statistics in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




2.C         Details of the cooperative groups

    Here are the details of the contributions of the groups for which symbolic sanctions are
introduced in the Introduction conditions.




                                                                      78


                                                                                                                           Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




                                                                          Negative Framing, 71                         Negative Framing, 72               Negative Framing, 73               Negative Framing, 74               Negative Framing, 91



                                                        20 40 60 80
         Contribution by group Introduction treatment
                                                        0




                                                                          Negative Framing, 92                         Negative Framing, 93               Negative Framing, 221              Negative Framing, 222              Negative Framing, 223
                                                        20 40 60 80
                                                        0




                                                                          Positive Framing, 51                         Positive Framing, 52                Positive Framing, 53               Positive Framing, 54               Positive Framing, 61
                                                        20 40 60 80
                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0       5    10    15       20

                                                                          Positive Framing, 62                         Positive Framing, 81                Positive Framing, 82               Positive Framing, 83
                                                        20 40 60 80
                                                        0




                                                                      0      5    10              15          20   0      5     10     15     20     0        5    10      15     20     0       5    10     15      20

                                                                                                                                            Periods from 1 to 20
                                                        Graphs by Framing and NUM_Groupe



Figure 2.C.1 – Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction
condition).




   Groups identified as high contributing groups (71, 74, 91) without peer pressure were exclu-
ded, in order to identify the treatment effect without these groups.
                                                                                               20
                                                                                    Tokens in group account
                                                                                     5         10
                                                                                               0        15




                                                                                                              0                        5                           10                            15                         20
                                                                                                                                                                  Period
                                                                                                                              Positive Framing Baseline                                Negative Framing Baseline

                                                                                                                              Positive Framing Monetary Sanction                       Negative Framing Monetary Sanction

                                                                                                                              Positive Framing Symbolic Sanction                       Negative Framing Symbolic Sanction




Figure 2.C.2 – Evolution of public good contribution in Introduction condition (excluding cooperative groups).




    Details about groups with a significantly higher contribution to the public good without any

                                                                                                                                                              79


                                      Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




mechanism.

               Table 2.C.1 – Details of subject type by group for the three groups

                               Group number                      Type
                                                    Prosocial     Individualist
                               71                   1             3
                               74                   1             3
                               91                   3             1


              Table 2.C.2 – Details of subject gender by group for the three groups

                                      Group number             Type
                                                            Men Women
                                      71                    0    4
                                      74                    1    3
                                      91                    2    2


Table 2.C.3 – Diff and Diff analysis in the negative framing Introduction condition for symbolic sanctions
without cooperative groups (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects).

                                                                         (1)            (2)
                                                                         pbl            pbl
                Groups where symbolic sanctions are introduced   1.685            2.133
                                                                                  (1.990)
                                                                 (2.149)
                                    Sequence                     -3.845∗ ∗ ∗      -3.852∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                  (0.918)
                                                                 (0.918)
                              Symbolic sanctions                 7.557∗ ∗ ∗       7.566∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                  (1.314)
                                                                 (1.314)
                                  SVO_score                                       17.02∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                  (5.067)

                                    Gender                                        2.672
                                                                                  (1.851)

                                      Age                                         -0.0946
                                                                                  (0.261)

                                Understanding                                     0.389
                                                                                  (0.803)

                                     _cons                       3.759∗∗          -6.121
                                                                 (1.478)          (8.178)
                                    sigma_u
                                      _cons                      7.490∗ ∗ ∗       6.655∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                 (0.820)          (0.744)
                                    sigma_e
                                     _cons                       10.25∗ ∗ ∗       10.24∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                 (0.340)          (0.340)
                                       N                         1200             1200
                t statistics in parentheses
                * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




  Groups where sanctions are introduced is a dummy variable which is equal to 1 whenever
monetary sanction are introduced in sequence 2.

                                                       80


                                         Introduction of chapters 2 and 3




2.D      Analysis without the cooperative groups

Table 2.D.1 – Individual contributions to the group account, for all framing data excluding the three coope-
rative groups excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects).

                                                 (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)
                                               All data   All data   All data    Without sanction
                         Framing                3.621∗ ∗ ∗ 3.048∗ ∗ ∗ 2.642∗ ∗ ∗      3.598∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.983)     (1.002)    (1.020)        (1.134)

                         Symbolic sanctions     4.830∗ ∗ ∗ 5.773∗ ∗ ∗ 5.771∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.436)     (0.639)    (0.638)

                         Material sanctions     11.52∗ ∗ ∗ 9.457∗ ∗ ∗ 9.506∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.435)     (0.578)    (0.577)

                         Period                 -0.389∗ ∗ ∗ -0.385∗ ∗ ∗ -0.386∗ ∗ ∗    -0.700∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.0245)    (0.0245)    (0.0245)       (0.0414)

                         Symbolic × Framing                 -1.765∗∗    -1.730∗∗
                                                           (0.867)     (0.865)

                         Material × Framing                 4.510∗ ∗ ∗ 4.522∗ ∗ ∗
                                                           (0.856)     (0.854)

                         SVO_score                                      13.34∗ ∗ ∗     15.65∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                       (2.455)        (2.826)

                         Gender                                         1.704∗         1.771∗
                                                                       (0.927)        (1.065)

                         Age                                            -0.131        -0.0312
                                                                       (0.124)        (0.143)

                         Understanding                                  0.503          -0.184
                                                                       (0.326)        (0.374)

                         _cons                  5.561∗ ∗ ∗ 5.840∗ ∗ ∗ -1.009           2.085
                                               (0.746)     (0.748)    (3.672)         (4.251)
                         sigma_u
                         _cons                  8.299∗ ∗ ∗ 8.177∗ ∗ ∗ 7.697∗ ∗ ∗       8.659∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.385)     (0.380)    (0.361)         (0.450)
                         sigma_e
                         _cons                  9.860∗ ∗ ∗ 9.827∗ ∗ ∗ 9.828∗ ∗ ∗       9.297∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.144)     (0.143)    (0.143)         (0.179)
                         N                      6240        6240       6240            3720
                         Standard errors in parentheses
                         * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                           81


                                            Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.D.2 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction
conditions, for all framing data excluding the three cooperative groups excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided
random effects).

                            (1)               (2)               (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                       Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl     Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
  Framing                  3.824∗ ∗ ∗        4.143∗ ∗ ∗        4.249∗ ∗ ∗           3.148∗ ∗ ∗           2.047∗               1.197
                          (1.423)           (1.459)           (1.469)              (1.107)              (1.079)              (1.101)

  Symbolic sanctions       1.579∗∗           1.506             1.568               7.701∗ ∗ ∗           9.607∗ ∗ ∗           9.667∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.769)           (1.016)           (1.015)             (0.702)              (0.929)              (0.923)

  Material sanctions       6.511∗ ∗ ∗        7.409∗ ∗ ∗        7.513∗ ∗ ∗          15.69∗ ∗ ∗           11.14∗ ∗ ∗           11.29∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.760)           (0.957)           (0.955)             (0.708)              (0.845)              (0.840)

  Period                   -0.608∗ ∗ ∗       -0.609∗ ∗ ∗       -0.604∗ ∗ ∗         -0.596∗ ∗ ∗          -0.588∗ ∗ ∗          -0.593∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.0450)          (0.0450)          (0.0450)            (0.0428)             (0.0422)             (0.0421)

  Symbolic × Framing                         0.130             0.175                                    -3.610∗ ∗ ∗          -3.585∗ ∗ ∗
                                            (1.272)           (1.269)                                  (1.120)              (1.113)

  Material × Framing                         -1.939            -1.870                                   10.05∗ ∗ ∗           10.02∗ ∗ ∗
                                            (1.247)           (1.245)                                  (1.122)              (1.115)

  SVO_score                                                    14.61∗ ∗ ∗                                                    15.19∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (3.598)                                                       (2.635)

  Gender                                                       0.957                                                         2.494∗∗
                                                              (1.381)                                                       (0.974)

  Age                                                         -0.0622                                                        -0.197
                                                              (0.179)                                                       (0.141)

  Understanding                                                0.368                                                         0.401
                                                              (0.459)                                                       (0.369)

  _cons                    8.755∗ ∗ ∗        8.599∗ ∗ ∗        0.299               7.183∗ ∗ ∗           7.747∗ ∗ ∗           1.713
                          (1.171)           (1.183)           (5.320)             (0.848)              (0.817)              (4.221)
  sigma_u
  _cons                    9.182∗ ∗ ∗        9.191∗ ∗ ∗        8.712∗ ∗ ∗          7.277∗ ∗ ∗           6.841∗ ∗ ∗           6.133∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.559)           (0.560)           (0.535)             (0.432)              (0.413)              (0.378)
  sigma_e
  _cons                    9.703∗ ∗ ∗        9.701∗ ∗ ∗        9.703∗ ∗ ∗          9.542∗ ∗ ∗           9.421∗ ∗ ∗           9.421∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.191)           (0.191)           (0.191)             (0.172)              (0.170)              (0.170)
  N                        3600              3600              3600                3840                 3840                 3840
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                   82


                                        Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.D.3 – Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group, for all framing
data excluding the three cooperative groups excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects)).

                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)
                                                    All data   All data   All data    Without sanction
                       Framing                       3.895∗ ∗ ∗ 3.223∗ ∗ ∗ 2.981∗ ∗ ∗      3.898∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.953)     (0.977)    (1.001)        (1.074)

                       Symbolic sanctions            4.941∗ ∗ ∗ 5.745∗ ∗ ∗ 5.742∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.444)     (0.649)    (0.648)

                       Material sanctions            11.90∗ ∗ ∗ 9.736∗ ∗ ∗ 9.787∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.445)     (0.589)    (0.588)

                       Period                        -0.367∗ ∗ ∗ -0.364∗ ∗ ∗ -0.364∗ ∗ ∗    -0.675∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.0264)    (0.0263)    (0.0263)       (0.0441)

                       Initial group contribution     0.167∗ ∗ ∗ 0.159∗ ∗ ∗ 0.145∗ ∗ ∗       0.177∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.0292)    (0.0289)   (0.0278)        (0.0311)

                       Symbolic × Framing                        -1.517∗     -1.485∗
                                                                (0.883)     (0.881)

                       Material × Framing                        4.754∗ ∗ ∗ 4.757∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                (0.874)     (0.872)

                       SVO_score                                             12.05∗ ∗ ∗     14.01∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                            (2.416)        (2.690)

                       Gender                                                1.656∗         1.689∗
                                                                            (0.907)        (1.008)

                       Age                                                   -0.162        -0.0801
                                                                            (0.122)        (0.135)

                       Understanding                                         0.340          -0.418
                                                                            (0.320)        (0.356)

                       _cons                         -2.237      -1.579      -5.644         -2.878
                                                    (1.474)     (1.464)     (3.695)        (4.121)
                       sigma_u
                       _cons                         8.001∗ ∗ ∗ 7.907∗ ∗ ∗ 7.498∗ ∗ ∗       8.106∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.376)     (0.372)    (0.356)         (0.428)
                       sigma_e
                       _cons                         9.772∗ ∗ ∗ 9.736∗ ∗ ∗ 9.737∗ ∗ ∗       9.235∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.147)     (0.146)    (0.146)         (0.183)
                       N                             5928        5928       5928            3528
                       Standard errors in parentheses
                       * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                              83


                                                 Introduction of chapters 2 and 3



Table 2.D.4 – Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group discriminating
for Removal and Introduction conditions, for all framing data excluding the three cooperative groups excluded
(panel tobit estimation two sided random effects).

                                    (1)               (2)              (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                               Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl     Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
  Framing                          3.617∗ ∗ ∗        3.622∗∗          3.816∗ ∗ ∗           3.161∗ ∗ ∗           2.112∗∗              1.636
                                  (1.391)           (1.426)          (1.444)              (1.048)              (1.039)              (1.073)

  Symbolic sanctions               1.635∗∗           1.086            1.139               7.452∗ ∗ ∗           9.449∗ ∗ ∗           9.501∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.785)           (1.036)          (1.035)             (0.710)              (0.938)              (0.932)

  Material sanctions               7.107∗ ∗ ∗        7.606∗ ∗ ∗       7.699∗ ∗ ∗          15.42∗ ∗ ∗           10.99∗ ∗ ∗           11.13∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.778)           (0.976)          (0.974)             (0.715)              (0.855)              (0.850)

  Period                           -0.597∗ ∗ ∗      -0.597∗ ∗ ∗       -0.592∗ ∗ ∗         -0.539∗ ∗ ∗          -0.531∗ ∗ ∗          -0.537∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.0483)         (0.0483)          (0.0483)            (0.0455)             (0.0449)             (0.0448)

  Initial group contribution        0.236∗ ∗ ∗      0.236∗ ∗ ∗         0.217∗ ∗ ∗          0.139∗ ∗ ∗           0.116∗ ∗ ∗          0.0959∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.0520)         (0.0521)          (0.0502)            (0.0305)             (0.0292)             (0.0278)

  Symbolic × Framing                                 1.051            1.088                                    -3.806∗ ∗ ∗          -3.776∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (1.302)          (1.300)                                  (1.136)              (1.129)

  Material × Framing                                 -1.095           -1.031                                   9.744∗ ∗ ∗           9.728∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (1.280)          (1.279)                                  (1.136)              (1.129)

  SVO_score                                                           13.47∗ ∗ ∗                                                    13.07∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (3.538)                                                       (2.601)

  Gender                                                              0.772                                                         2.180∗∗
                                                                     (1.355)                                                       (0.944)

  Age                                                                -0.0200                                                        -0.260∗
                                                                     (0.176)                                                       (0.137)

  Understanding                                                       0.280                                                         0.164
                                                                     (0.451)                                                       (0.360)

  _cons                            -2.383            -2.395           -9.691∗             0.844                2.322                0.919
                                  (2.649)           (2.651)          (5.669)             (1.481)              (1.423)              (4.091)
  sigma_u
  _cons                            8.910∗ ∗ ∗        8.915∗ ∗ ∗       8.509∗ ∗ ∗          6.829∗ ∗ ∗           6.478∗ ∗ ∗           5.884∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.547)           (0.548)          (0.527)             (0.413)              (0.396)              (0.367)
  sigma_e
  _cons                            9.619∗ ∗ ∗        9.618∗ ∗ ∗       9.620∗ ∗ ∗          9.466∗ ∗ ∗           9.345∗ ∗ ∗           9.346∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.196)           (0.196)          (0.196)             (0.175)              (0.173)              (0.173)
  N                                3420              3420             3420                3648                 3648                 3648
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                       84


              Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing
                                                                                               3
This chapter is based on joint work with and Katherine Farrow, David Masclet and Marc
Willinger




                                             Abstract


Andreoni (1995) showed that framing effects might influence contribution in Voluntary Contribu-
tion Mechanisms (VCM) by comparing a standard public goods game, called the positive frame
condition, with a negative frame condition. In the former, a subject’s decision to invest in the pu-
blic good makes the other subjects better off, whereas, in the latter, a subjects’ decision to invest
in his/her private good makes the other subjects worse off. This paper examines whether framing
influences the effectiveness of a mechanism that has been shown to foster cooperation, particu-
larly peer pressure (Masclet et al., 2003). There is little evidence on this topic. Nevertheless,
Messer et al. 2013 demonstrate that the efficiency of cheap talk mechanisms, such as communi-
cation and voting, is lower when the VCM is negatively framed. Our experimental design varies
both the frame of the game, “à la Andreoni”, and the opportunity for sending symbolic sanctions
that are free of charge for the sender and the receiver. We did not replicate Andreoni (1995)’s
findings in this set of data ; this is partly explained by three groups whose contributions are
abnormally high. Our results also suggest that Andreoni (1995)’s framing is fragile and strongly
depends on groups inherent willingness to cooperate. Nevertheless, we found that framing has an
impact on subjects’ perceptions of the effects of others’ actions and on their reported conditional
contributions. Both are lower in the negative frame. Moreover, since both are important drivers
of group dynamics, we suggest that framing may impact group dynamics.

   Keywords : cooperation, public good, framing, peer pressure.




                                                 85


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.1     Introduction

    Social norms have been shown to affect substantially groups’ ability to cooperate (Barron &
Gjerde, 1997 ; Holländer, 1990 ; Lindbeck et al., 2003 ; Kandel & Lazear, 1992). The ability to
communicate, and therefore to signal approval or disapproval of other group members’ actions is
one of the mechanisms that can promote collective action (Ostrom et al., 1994 ; Ostrom, 1992 ;
Ostrom, 2000). It can be described as "cheap talk" because it allows subjects to express their
expectations and disapproval concerning behaviors, without affecting material incentives. One of
the mechanisms that have proven to be effective in promoting cooperation is symbolic sanctions,
which are free of charge for both senders and recipients (Masclet et al., 2003). The main reasons
put forward are that they allow subjects to express their expectations and disagreement in terms
of behavior, and thus activate reciprocity and guilt aversion (Masclet et al., 2003 ; Dugar, 2010 ;
Dugar, 2013).

    However, little is known regarding the robustness of this mechanism to contextual change. In
other words, can agents’ perceptions of the collective action problem they face, or of the actions
of others, influence the effectiveness of this mechanism ? Indeed, most of the real-world collective
action issues such as the management of a natural resource or the provision of a public good (i.e.
public infrastructures) are complex. The perception (or misperception) that individuals have of
the functioning of the collective good, the actions of others and their real effects, influence their
willingness to cooperate and their preferences for contribution rules (Ostrom, 1990 ; Kuziemko
et al., 2015 ; Alesina et al., 2018). In this paper, we aim to contribute to the debate regarding
the impact of framing on peer pressure’s effectiveness. We add a new perspective to the existing
literature by testing the role of framing as defined by Andreoni (1995) on the effectiveness of
symbolic sanctions.

    Advances in experimental economics showed that the way the voluntary contribution mecha-
nism (VCM) is presented significantly influences outcomes even though economic incentives are
unchanged (Andreoni, 1995 ; Gächter et al., 2017 ; Messer et al., 2007 ; Park, 2000 ; Willinger &
Ziegelmeyer, 1999). Various studies attempted to explain these findings by isolating the possible
framing effects (Andreoni, 1995 ; Cox, 2015 ; Cubitt et al., 2011a ; Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ; Fos-
gaard et al., 2014 ; Fujimoto & Park, 2010 ; Khadjavi & Lange, 2015 ; Park, 2000). They found
that cooperation tends to be stronger when subjects have to create a resource (i.e. giving to the
public good) than when there is a maintenance issue (i.e. taking from the public good). One
possible explanation is that subjects are more willing to cooperate when they perceive the po-
tential externalities resulting from social interaction as positive rather negative. Andreoni (1995)
advocates that subjects prefer doing good to others ("warm glow") than doing bad ("cold pri-
ckle"). Cubitt et al. (2011b), demonstrated that the give and the take frame generate different
expectations. Not contributing under the context of giving is much more blameworthy than in
the context of taking. It seems that the context generated by the frame affects agents’ moral
judgments of others’ actions and thus their reciprocity.

    In this paper, we try to disentangle this effect, relying on the distinction introduced by Cart-
wright (2016) between the "give and take frame" and the frame as defined by Andreoni (1995). In
the framing proposed by Andreoni (1995), the subjects’ endowments are not initially distributed
in any account. They must choose how much they invest in the group (public) account and how
much they invest in the private account. In comparison, in the give frame (take), the endow-
ments are initially allocated to the private (public) account, and they must choose how much
they invest in the public (private) account. In Andreoni (1995) ’s frame, the actions proposed to
the subjects are strictly identical. The positive and negative frame created by Andreoni (1995)

                                                 86


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




differs in the way the consequences of the actions are presented to the subjects. In the positive
frame, investing in the group account is presented as having a positive effect on the earnings of
other players ; whereas in the negative frame, investing in the private account is presented as
having a negative effect on the earnings of other players. This way of framing the contribution
game focuses on the potential consequences of subjects’ actions and is therefore relevant for
investigating the robustness of a peer pressure mechanism.

    We conjecture that if failing to contribute to the public good is judged more morally bla-
meworthy than exploiting an existing public good, one should observe more cooperation in the
positive framing. Moreover, the reciprocity dynamic should also be easier to encourage in a
positive frame. There is no evidence about how the frame affects the effectiveness of symbolic
sanctions. However, Messer et al. (2013) 1 showed that the frame affects the effectiveness of other
cheap talk mechanisms such as communication and voting. More specifically, Messer et al. (2013)
have shown that when the subjects’ actions can only generate negative externalities (i.e. their
endowment is initially in the public account), the introduction of communication and voting is
less effective than when their actions can only generate positive externalities (i.e. their endow-
ment is initially in the private account). We assume that the effectiveness of the peer pressure
mechanism may also be affected by the frame.

    We reproduce Andreoni (1995) ’s frame, and we give subjects the opportunity to send sym-
bolic sanctions. We varied the order of the treatment by either playing first the no symbolic
sanctions treatment followed by the symbolic sanctions treatment (Introduction condition) or
the opposite (Removal condition). Our main result is the absence of framing effect in this set
of data. It is partly due to three groups whose contributions are significantly higher than the
other groups. However, it must also be concluded that the framing effect is fragile and depends
strongly on the dynamics of the groups, which is determined by the willingness of the subjects
to cooperate without any mechanism. The introduction of symbolic sanctions generally has a
positive effect on contributions to the public good and, therefore, on the earnings of individuals
(Masclet et al., 2003 ; Dugar, 2010 ; Dugar 2013). However, this effect is strongly dependent on
the dynamics inherent to each group. Besides, the effect of symbolic sanctions is mainly observed
when they are introduced after the subjects have experienced for the first time a sequence in
which they have been unable to express their disapproval. In this experiment, we did not observe
a different effect of symbolic sanctions according to the frame. Once again, the fact that the
groups composing the negative frame have a strong willingness to cooperate (without any me-
chanism) and react strongly to the introduction of symbolic sanctions may be an explanation. It
should be noted that the number of symbolic sanctions imposed is slightly higher in the negative
frame, even if the drivers of disapproval are identical in the two frames. Finally, framing seems to
affect the perception of others’ actions and the stated reciprocity, i.e. the declared contribution
with regards to others’ actions, are both higher in the positive frame.

    The remainder of this chapter is organized as follow. Section 2 describes the experimental
design. In section 3, we discuss our theoretical predictions. Section 4 presents the results. Section
5 discusses the main findings.
   1. Messer et al. (2013) are using an alternative to the give and take frame, labelling respectively the public
and the private account, account A and B.




                                                       87


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.2    Experimental design

    The experiment consists of a repeated linear public good game with and without the oppor-
tunity to send symbolic sanctions to other group members. Subjects are assigned to groups of
four players. Treatments rely on two dimensions, 2 × 2 factorial design : 2 framings (positive
vs negative) and 2 conditions (with and without the availability of peer pressure through the
sending of symbolic disapprovals). Each of the four treatments is repeated over 10 periods.

    We adopt a partner matching with a within subject design. Each group was exposed to two
conditions : with and without peer pressure. We control for possible order effects by varying the
sequence in which symbolic sanctions are available. Each subject only experienced one frame
(positive or negative). However, for the treatments where symbolic sanctions are introduced, no
disapproval ratings is available in the first sequence and it is introduced in the second sequence,
or the opposite. Treatments for which symbolic sanctions are available in the first sequence and
removed in the second one, are called Removal condition. They correspond to treatments T3 and
T6 (cf table 3.1). Treatments with the reverse order, are called Introduction condition (T2 and
T5). The baseline treatment refers to treatments in which subjects played two sequences without
peer pressure (T1 and T4).

Table 3.1 – Number of subjects per treatment in Symbolic sanction experiment [number of
groups]

 Treatment     Framing    Part 1                  Part 2                              Number of subjects
                          period(1 − 10)          period(11 − 20)                         [groups]
 T1                       Baseline                Baseline                                  28[7]
 T2            Positive   Baseline                Symbolic sanctions (Introduction)         36[9]
 T3                       Symbolic sanctions      Baseline (Removal)                        32[8]
 T4                       Baseline                Baseline                                  32[8]
 T5           Negative    Baseline                Symbolic sanctions (Introduction)        40[10]
 T6                       Symbolic sanctions      Baseline (Removal)                        28[7]

    Andreoni (1995) ’s design has the feature that subjects have to do exactly the same task in
both frames (positive and negative one). Players’ strategy sets and payoff functions are strictly
identical in both frames. In the first stage, they have to allocate their endowment between the
Individual Exchange (xi ) and the Group Exchange (yi ). The sum must be equal to 20 tokens,
which corresponds to the endowment of each subject per period.

    In the Positive frame, investment in the group contribution is presented as having a positive
effect on others’ payoffs. The exact statement of the instructions was : "Every token you invest
in the Individual Exchange will yield a return of one. [...] Every token invested in the Group
Exchange will yield a return of β = 0.4 for each member of the group, not just the person who
invested it." This frame makes explicit that each group’s member can have a positive influence
onto others through his investment in the group account. Player i’s earning under the positive
framing can therefore be written :
                                  Πi (yi , y−i ) = xi + β(yi + y−i )                          (3.1)
In contrast, under the Negative frame, the instructions stated : "Every token you invest in the
Individual Exchange will yield a return of one. However, each token invested in the Individual
Exchange will reduce the earnings of other players by β = 0.4. It will also be true that when the
other members of your group invest in the Individual Exchange, then your earnings will be reduced

                                                 88


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




by 0.4 times their investment in the Individual Exchange.[...] Every token invested in the Group
Exchange will yields a return of β = 0.4." In this framing, each token invested in the private
account has a negative impact onto other’s payoffs. It is intended to make subjects perceive the
social interaction has having potential negative effects. The formal expression of player i’s payoff
under negative framing is given by equation 3.2. The negative externality of others’ investments
on a subject’s payoff is described by (−βx−i ). For payoffs to be strictly identical, for the same
action in both frames, in the negative frame players receive an automatic earning each period,
equal to β(n − 1)e (24 ECU with our parameters 0.4 × 3 × 20). From equation 3.2 it is easy to
see that payoffs are identical under both frames, since y−i = (n − 1)e − x−i :

                            Πi (xi , x−i ) = xi − βx−i + βyi + β(n − 1)e                       (3.2)

In treatments where subjects can express their disapproval, by sending symbolic sanctions, there
is a second stage in each period. In this second stage, once the contribution to the group account
of each group member is displayed, subjects must decide individually the number of symbolic
sanctions that they send to each other member. In every period, subjects can send from 0
to 5 symbolic sanctions to each member of their group. In order to avoid, reputation effects,
subjects’contributions are presented in a random order in each new period. Symbolic sanctions
do not affect payoffs. Nevertheless, at the end of each period, subjects get informed about the
number of symbolic sanctions they individually received.

     The experiment was conducted in the Experimental Economics Laboratory of Montpel-
lier(LEEM) between May 2018 and November 2019. In total 196 subjects participated in the
experiment. Upon arrival at the laboratory, each participant chose a cubicle to seat in front of
a computer terminal. Subjects were invited to first read instructions privately, after which they
were read again out loud by the person in charge of the experiment. The experiment consisted
of 3 parts. In part 1, each participant’s social value orientation (SVO) was elicitated following
Murphy et al. (2011). In this task, subjects were asked to make 15 allocation decisions between
themselves and an anonymous receiver. For each decision, 9 options were proposed. One of the
fifteen allocation decisions was randomly selected to be paid at the end of each session. In order
not to influence the willingness to cooperate of subjects in the public good game, they were infor-
med of the results of the SVO at the end of the experiment only. Before starting the experiment,
each participant had to answer eight control questions. After each question, the correct answer
and a detailed explanation were displayed. This part aimed to help participants understand the
game and how contributions translated into earnings and vice versa. The answers to the com-
prehension questionnaire were used by the experimenter to compute an understanding score. An
experimental session lasted approximately one hour and a half. The average payment was 16.01
euros in addition to a show-up fee of 2 to 6 euros depending on how far the participant travelled
to participate in the experiment. The experiments were conducted using zTree (Fischbacher,
2007). The SVO procedure was adapted from Crosetto et al. (2012).



3.3    Behavioural predictions for symbolic sanctions

    As the economic incentives remain unchanged, the frame should not influence the contribution
to the group account and the reaction to peer pressure. However, from past experimental evidence,
we may assume that the way the collective action issue is presented to subjects may impact their
behavior (Andreoni, 1995 ; Gächter et al., 2017 ; Messer et al., 2007 ; Park, 2000 ; Willinger &
Ziegelmeyer, 1999). It has been shown that making salient the potential gains or losses of the same
action induces different behaviors (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). Moreover, the way a situation

                                                89


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




is described influences the acceptable behavior and moral judgment on them (Kahneman, 1992).
In VCM experiment, Cubitt et al. (2011b) show that not contributing in the give frame is judged
more severely than not contributing in the take frame (by withdrawing all). With regards to
these results, we state the first prediction.

   Prediction 1 : Contributions are lower in the negative frame than in the positive
frame.

    Symbolic sanctions do not affect payoffs, as they are free to send, and they do not reduce the
payoff of the subject receiving them. As a consequence, the implementation of such a mechanism
should not have any influence on the propensity to cooperate. Nevertheless, Masclet et al. (2003),
Dugar (2010) and Dugar (2013) provide evidence that symbolic sanctions can foster collective
action by increasing contributions to a public good significantly. Individuals seem to punish for
altruistic reasons, and the same reasons may explain their sensitivity to peer pressure (Fehr &
Gächter, 2002 ; Carpenter, 2007). It leads to our second prediction.

   Prediction 2 : The availability of symbolic sanctions increases contributions.

    From a theoretical point of view, the frame should not affect the reaction to peer pressure.
However, experimental evidence shows that the information provided to subjects affects their
reactions to the expression of social disapproval (Nikiforakis, 2010 ; Ramalingam et al., 2018).
Those experiments rely on monetary sanctions, but even when subjects are using disapprovals
that leave monetary incentives unchanged, the frame impacts the efficiency of those mechanisms.
Indeed, Messer et al. (2013) showed that communication and voting were less effective in a frame
where negative externalities were highlighted than in a frame where positive externalities were
highlighted. If it is less blameworthy not to contribute under the negative frame, it may impact
the reaction to symbolic disapproval.

  Prediction 3 : Peer pressure should be less efficient under negative framing than
under the positive frame.



3.4     Experimental Results

     In this section, we will first analyze how framing affects contributions. In order to understand
its interaction with symbolic sanctioning, we will analyze its influence on disapproving behavior
and the way subjects react to it. We will also analyze the effects of framing on the perception
of the actions of others and stated conditional contribution. Finally, we will analyze the effect of
framing on the effectiveness of symbolic disapprovals.


3.4.1    Voluntary contributions under different framing with and without peer
         pressure

   Result 1 : There is no significant framing effect in our data.

   Result 1 is supported by the panel tobit estimation presented in tables 3.2 and 3.3. The
dummy variable Framing is not significant. This result is also illustrated by figures 3.1, 3.2 and


                                                 90


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.3. This lack of effect is partly explained by three groups in the Introduction condition with a
negative frame which have a significantly higher contribution since the first period of the game
(i.e. without any mechanism that fosters cooperation). This fact is supported by the double-
difference analysis (Diff and Diff) where the dummy variable, distinguishing the groups where
symbolic sanctions were implemented, has a significant and positive impact on contributions (cf
appendix 3.F.4). It implies that those groups have a significantly higher contribution than the
other groups which are in the same conditions : in the negative frame and the first sequence of the
experiment without sanctions. The presence of these groups is one of the reasons that attenuate
the framing effect, which appears if one considers only the Removal Condition (as illustrated in
table 3.3).

    However, it also seems that the framing effect is fragile, and depends on the inherent capa-
cities of groups the cooperate. In this experiment, many groups under negative framing in the
Introduction condition, have a relatively high level of contribution to the public good during
the first sequence of the game (i.e. without symbolic sanctions). If we consider that this high
contribution reflects the inherent capacity of the group to cooperate, this may explain why there
is a high level of contribution when the mechanism that foster cooperation is introduced.
                                      80
                           20 30 40 50 60 70
                           Tokens in group account
                                      10
                                      0




                                                     0       5                         10                    15                     20
                                                                                      Period
                                                         Positive framing Baseline             Positive framing Symbolic Sanction

                                                         Negative framing Baseline             Negative framing Symbolic Sanction




Figure 3.1 – Evolution of the average group contribution in the Introduction condition in Symbolic sanctions
experiment.




                                                                                     91


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                    80
                         20 30 40 50 60 70
                         Tokens in group account
                                    10
                                    0


                                                   0      5                         10               15                      20
                                                                                   Period
                                                       Positive framing Symbolic Sanction        Positive framing Baseline

                                                       Negative framing Symbolic Sanction        Negative framing Baseline




Figure 3.2 – Evolution of the average group contribution in the Removal condition in Symbolic sanctions
experiment.
                                    80
                                    70
                         20 30 40 50 60
                         Tokens in group account
                                    10
                                    0




                                                   0      5                         10               15                      20
                                                                                   Period
                                                            Positive framing Baseline       Negative framing Baseline




                Figure 3.3 – Evolution of the average group contribution in the Baseline.




                                                                                92


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.2 – Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel tobit
estimation two sided, random effects).

                                        (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)              (5)
                                     All data      All data     All data      Without sanction   Sanctions
               Framing                -0.687        -0.134       -0.169            0.116           -3.820∗
                                     (1.375)       (1.407)      (1.401)           (1.443)         (2.075)

               Symbolic santions          5.250∗ ∗ ∗ 6.010∗ ∗ ∗ 6.047∗ ∗ ∗
                                         (0.437)    (0.612)    (0.611)

               Period                 -0.530∗ ∗ ∗ -0.532∗ ∗ ∗ -0.532∗ ∗ ∗          -0.626∗ ∗ ∗     -1.079∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0322)    (0.0323)    (0.0323)             (0.0453)        (0.103)

               Symbolic × Framing                    -1.535∗     -1.496∗
                                                    (0.861)     (0.860)

               SVO_score                                         14.97∗ ∗ ∗        15.70∗ ∗ ∗      10.08∗
                                                                (3.443)           (3.644)         (5.227)

               Gender                                            3.476∗ ∗ ∗        3.508∗∗         4.511∗∗
                                                                (1.291)           (1.366)         (1.969)

               Age                                               -0.220            -0.160          -0.292
                                                                (0.181)           (0.192)         (0.260)

               Understanding                                     0.553             0.279           1.323∗
                                                                (0.471)           (0.497)         (0.711)

               _cons                      9.291∗ ∗ ∗ 9.042∗ ∗ ∗ 1.848              2.596           14.50∗
                                         (1.020)    (1.028)    (5.373)            (5.697)         (7.733)
               sigma_u
               _cons                      9.258∗ ∗ ∗ 9.234∗ ∗ ∗ 8.579∗ ∗ ∗         8.896∗ ∗ ∗      10.68∗ ∗ ∗
                                         (0.540)    (0.539)    (0.506)            (0.570)         (0.827)
               sigma_e
               _cons                      10.05∗ ∗ ∗ 10.04∗ ∗ ∗ 10.04∗ ∗ ∗         9.190∗ ∗ ∗      10.32∗ ∗ ∗
                                         (0.188)    (0.188)    (0.188)            (0.212)         (0.339)
               N                          3920       3920       3920               2560            1360
               Standard errors in parentheses
               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                           93


                      Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.3 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
tions in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel tobit estimation, random effects).

                              (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                         Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                     3.543∗∗          3.488∗           3.528∗∗             -2.666∗              -1.910               -2.157
                            (1.802)          (1.833)          (1.799)             (1.442)              (1.456)              (1.423)

 Symbolic sanctions          1.612∗∗          1.504            1.595              8.813∗ ∗ ∗           10.07∗ ∗ ∗           10.16∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.782)          (1.022)          (1.019)            (0.720)              (0.888)              (0.884)

 Period                     -0.609∗ ∗ ∗      -0.609∗ ∗ ∗      -0.604∗ ∗ ∗         -0.703∗ ∗ ∗          -0.703∗ ∗ ∗          -0.707∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.0487)         (0.0487)         (0.0487)            (0.0486)             (0.0486)             (0.0485)

 Symbolic × Framing                           0.205            0.327                                   -2.673∗∗             -2.662∗∗
                                             (1.261)          (1.257)                                 (1.090)              (1.086)

 SVO_score                                                     19.96∗ ∗ ∗                                                   14.77∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (4.437)                                                      (3.553)

 Gender                                                        2.344                                                        3.817∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (1.659)                                                      (1.315)

 Age                                                          -0.0373                                                       -0.338∗
                                                              (0.230)                                                      (0.200)

 Understanding                                                 0.413                                                        0.398
                                                              (0.581)                                                      (0.507)

 _cons                       8.331∗ ∗ ∗       8.358∗ ∗ ∗       -4.258             11.61∗ ∗ ∗           11.26∗ ∗ ∗           7.349
                            (1.417)          (1.427)          (6.777)            (1.064)              (1.062)              (5.968)
 sigma_u
 _cons                       9.521∗ ∗ ∗       9.520∗ ∗ ∗       8.624∗ ∗ ∗         8.008∗ ∗ ∗           7.901∗ ∗ ∗           7.099∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.716)          (0.716)          (0.658)            (0.562)              (0.557)              (0.509)
 sigma_e
 _cons                       9.532∗ ∗ ∗       9.532∗ ∗ ∗       9.534∗ ∗ ∗         9.824∗ ∗ ∗           9.817∗ ∗ ∗           9.817∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.230)          (0.230)          (0.230)            (0.215)              (0.215)              (0.215)
 N                           2400             2400             2400               2720                 2720                 2720
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




    Result 2 : The ability to express disapproval, by sending symbolic sanctions increases signi-
ficantly contributions to the public good.

    Result 2 is supported by the panel tobit estimation presented in tables 3.2. The dummy
variable Symbolic Sanction has a significant and positive effect (cf columns (1), (2), (3)). It has
to be noted that this mechanism seems to be more efficient in the Introduction condition, i.e.
after subjects experienced a sequence in which there were not able to express their disapproval.
This result is supported by the variable "Symbolic sanction" presented in table 3.3 which has a
positive and significant sign in the Introduction condition, columns (4), (5) and (6).

     Result 3 : Peer pressure is no less effective under negative framing.

    Result 3 is supported by the interaction variable Symbolic × Framing which has a negative
sign but with a low significance effect on contribution to the public good, as illustrated in
table 3.2. It implies that if there is an efficiency difference of symbolic sanctions depending on
the frame, but in the direction opposite to the predicted one. This effect is mainly due to the
higher effect of symbolic sanction in the Introduction condition as it can be seen from table 3.3.
Once again, this effect can be partially explained by the higher capacity of those three groups to
cooperate without disapproval ratings.

   Given these results, it is important to analyze whether framing affects the dynamics of peer
pressure and the reactions to it.



                                                                  94


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.4.2    Disapproval behavior

     Does framing influence the likelihood of disapproving others’ actions and the severity of this
disapproval ? To answers these questions, we consider two aspects of peer pressure. First, we
analyze whether the propensity to disapprove others’ actions depends on the frame : does the
likelihood of sending symbolic sanctions differ according to the frame ? To answer this question,
we analyze subjects’ symbolic disapproval vectors, i.e. the three symbolic disapproval decisions
taken by subject i towards subjects j 6= i. Second, we study whether the intensity of peer pressure
is frame dependent.
            P        To do so, we analyze whether the sum of the symbolic sanctions received by
subjects i ( pji ) differs between frames.


Is the propensity to send symbolic sanctions frame-dependent ?


   Result 4 : The propensity to disapprove is lower in the positive frame.

     Result 4 is illustrated by figure 3.4, which shows that the number of symbolic sanctions sent
is slightly higher in the negative frame. Moreover, it is supported by the results of the regressions
presented in table 3.4. The dummy variable Framing has a negative and significant impact on
the likelihood to send symbolic sanctions.

    One of the main disapproval factors of subject j is his lower contribution compared to subjects
i that sent him symbolic sanctions (yj − yi < 0). In reverse, if subject j’s contribution is higher
than subject i’s, subject j is less likely to receive symbolic sanctions. The social comparison with
the other group members also seems to have an impact. If subject j’s contribution is larger than
the average of the two others members of the group (yj − ȳ−i−j > 0), he is less likely to be
disapproved by subject i.
                                      10           9
                         Number of sanction received
                         6      7     5   8




                                                       0   2          4               6                  8   10
                                                                             Period
                                                               Positive Framing           Negative Framing




                 Figure 3.4 – Evolution of the number of symbolic sanctions received.




                                                                          95


                     Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.4 – Subject i’s propensity to send symbolic sanction to subject j (probit analysis with cluster by
subject).

                                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                                  All data    All data    Removal      Removal       Introduction    Introduction
  Framing                                                          -0.395∗ ∗ ∗ -0.389∗ ∗ ∗ -0.329∗∗     -0.350∗∗         -0.485∗ ∗ ∗     -0.436∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.111)      (0.110)     (0.165)     (0.167)          (0.160)         (0.165)

  (absolute) Negative Deviation yj − yi < 0                         0.151∗ ∗ ∗ 0.140∗ ∗ ∗ 0.147∗ ∗ ∗ 0.137∗ ∗ ∗          0.159∗ ∗ ∗      0.145∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.0167)    (0.0169)   (0.0219)   (0.0223)           (0.0273)        (0.0276)

  Positive Deviation yj − yi > 0                                   -0.0661∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0509∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0588∗ ∗ ∗-0.0472∗∗      -0.0742∗ ∗ ∗    -0.0554∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.0114)     (0.0135)     (0.0183)     (0.0222)      (0.0132)        (0.0156)

  Own contribution                                                 -0.0891∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0793∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0863∗ ∗ ∗-0.0784∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0951∗ ∗ ∗      -0.0820∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.00840)    (0.00953)    (0.0122)     (0.0141)     (0.0125)         (0.0146)

  Period                                                          -0.00815    -0.000632      -0.0118   -0.00684        -0.00668        0.00482
                                                                  (0.0126)     (0.0137)     (0.0169)   (0.0179)        (0.0191)        (0.0215)

  Sequence                                                          0.323∗      0.255
                                                                   (0.166)     (0.171)

  Positive deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j > 0                            -0.0234∗∗               -0.0171                         -0.0279∗∗
                                                                               (0.0103)                (0.0159)                        (0.0139)

  (absolute) Negative deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j < 0                 0.0121                  0.0115                          0.0132
                                                                               (0.0115)                (0.0152)                        (0.0176)

  _cons                                                             0.900∗ ∗ ∗ 0.790∗ ∗ ∗ 0.845∗ ∗ ∗ 0.770∗ ∗ ∗         1.310∗ ∗ ∗       1.025∗∗
                                                                   (0.177)     (0.198)    (0.229)    (0.252)           (0.381)          (0.449)
  N                                                                 3720        3720       1800       1800              1920             1920
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




Is the number of symbolic sanctions sent frame dependent ?


    The number of symbolic sanctions sent is higher in the negative frame, as illustrated in
figure 3.4. However, the likelihood of receiving symbolic sanctions, once taking into account the
deviation from peer’s average contribution (|yi − ȳ−i |), is similar in both frames, as illustrated
in figure 3.5.

    The number of symbolic sanctions received is slightly higher in the negative frame. This result
seems to be confirmed by the panel tobit estimation presented in table 3.5. The dummy variable
Framing is negatively correlated with the number of symbolic sanctions received, even if this
result is not robust. The severity of peers’ disapproval is linked to a negative deviation from the
contribution of other group members (as illustrated in figure 3.5). The less a subject contributes
compared to his peers, the higher the number of disapproval he receives (see figure 3.6).

    To sum up, being disapproved is mainly due to a lower contribution than peers. As such, it is
determined by social comparisons. The number of symbolic sanctions sent and received is slightly
higher in the negative frame, but the drivers of disapproval seem to be the same. We conclude
that the higher level of symbolic sanctions send is linked to a higher dispersion of contributions. It
is corroborated by the higher number of observations deviating from peers’ average contribution
in the negative frame.




                                                                     96


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                                                        31 18       68           139




                            10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                                                                           57          164




                           Percentage disapproved by deviation level
                                                                                                              193

                                                                                                                    216
                                                                                                                           156          72 67       21
                                                                                                                                 140

                                                                                                                                                           18




                                               0



                                                                       [-20,-14)    [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]           (14,20]
                                                                                          Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                            Negative Framing                     Positive Framing




  Figure 3.5 – Likelihood to receive symbolic sanctions by deviation level (with number of observations).
                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15




                                                                          31
                                                                                      68

                                                                               18
                                                                                            57
                                  Average points received




                                                                                                  139
                                                                                                        164




                                                                                                               193
                                                                                                                     216

                                                                                                                            156
                                                                                                                                  140    72 67
                                                                                                                                                      21
                                                                                                                                                            18




                                                                       [-20,-14)    [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]           (14,20]
                                                                                          Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                            Negative Framing                     Positive Framing




Figure 3.6 – Average number of symbolic sanctions received by deviation level (with number of observations).




                                                                                                              97


                 Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



     Table 3.5 – Number of symbolic sanctions received (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                                                  (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)                 (5)             (6)
                                               All data    All data   Removal     Removal         Introduction    Introduction
 Framing                                        -1.944∗ ∗ ∗ -1.159     -1.388      0.289              -2.180∗ ∗ ∗     -2.581
                                               (0.471)     (0.853)    (0.863)     (1.134)            (0.533)         (1.724)

 Positive Deviation yi − ȳ−i > 0               -0.491∗ ∗ ∗ -0.506∗ ∗ ∗ -0.446∗ ∗ ∗ -0.365∗ ∗ ∗      -0.530∗ ∗ ∗    -0.605∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.0314)    (0.0429)    (0.0475)    (0.0639)         (0.0414)       (0.0575)

 (absolute) Negative Deviation yi − ȳ−i ≤ 0     0.925∗ ∗ ∗ 0.977∗ ∗ ∗ 0.941∗ ∗ ∗ 1.110∗ ∗ ∗          0.925∗ ∗ ∗     0.912∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.0341)    (0.0460)   (0.0522)   (0.0773)           (0.0450)       (0.0567)

 Peers’average contribution                     -0.542∗ ∗ ∗ -0.543∗ ∗ ∗ -0.603∗ ∗ ∗ -0.608∗ ∗ ∗      -0.519∗ ∗ ∗    -0.523∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.0313)    (0.0313)    (0.0488)    (0.0481)         (0.0418)       (0.0419)

 Period                                         0.0966∗∗  0.118∗∗      0.0273       0.0587            0.142∗∗        0.155∗∗
                                               (0.0430)  (0.0508)     (0.0623)     (0.0834)         (0.0593)       (0.0782)

 Sequence                                       0.226       0.271
                                               (0.635)     (0.634)

 Period × Framing                                          -0.0506                 -0.0720                         -0.00786
                                                          (0.0586)                 (0.108)                          (0.101)

 Positive Deviation × Framing                              0.0304                   -0.143                          0.155∗
                                                          (0.0612)                 (0.0927)                        (0.0815)

 (absolute) Negative Deviation × Framing                   -0.114∗                  -0.297∗ ∗ ∗                     0.0326
                                                          (0.0646)                 (0.0968)                        (0.0880)

 _cons                                          9.809∗ ∗ ∗ 9.458∗ ∗ ∗ 10.27∗ ∗ ∗ 9.389∗ ∗ ∗          9.357∗ ∗ ∗      9.445∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.648)    (0.719)     (0.897)    (0.970)            (1.268)         (1.487)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                          2.420∗ ∗ ∗ 2.407∗ ∗ ∗ 3.061∗ ∗ ∗ 3.016∗ ∗ ∗          1.788∗ ∗ ∗      1.798∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.191)    (0.191)     (0.338)    (0.333)            (0.222)         (0.222)
 sigma_e
 _cons                                           3.655∗ ∗ ∗ 3.645∗ ∗ ∗ 3.571∗ ∗ ∗ 3.524∗ ∗ ∗         3.698∗ ∗ ∗      3.683∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.0954)    (0.0952)    (0.144)    (0.143)           (0.127)         (0.126)
 N                                               1360        1360        600        600               760             760
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




3.4.3       Responsiveness to symbolic sanctions

   To analyze how framing influences responsiveness to disapproval, we consider first how the
number of symbolic sanctions received affects the change in contribution. Second, we analyze
how the sending of symbolic sanctions affects the formation of a common contribution level.


How do symbolic sanctions affect changes in contributions ?


    We observe that the larger the number of symbolic sanctions received by a subject, the more
likely he will increase his contribution to the public good. It is supported by the positive and
significant effect of the variable "Symbolic sanctions received in t−1" on the contribution change
between period t − 1 and t presented in table 3.6.

   However, it is worth noticing that on average subjects must receive a relatively high number of
symbolic sanctions to increase their contribution to the public good, over 7 points as illustrated


                                                           98


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




in figure 3.7. On average, below this number, subjects do not react by an increase but by a
decrease in their contributions. This observation suggests that the strength of the disapproval
signal induced by symbolic sanctions is relatively low.

    There is no difference in reactions to the received sanction according to the frame. This
result is supported by the panel regressions presented in table 3.6. The variable Framing and the
interaction variable Symbolic sanctions received in t−1 × Framing, which reflects the potentially
different reaction to the symbolic sanctions received between the two framings, are not significant.
As a result, there is no difference in reactions to the symbolic sanctions received according to
the frame. The main drivers of the evolution of contributions are linked to social comparison.
If the individual had a higher contribution than the members of his group in the previous, he
generally decreases his contribution in the following period. Conversely, if an individual had a
lower contribution than the average contribution of the other members of his group, he increases
his contribution. Those results are supported by the variables Positive deviation in t − 1 and
Negative deviation in t − 1, which have respectively negative and positive significant effects on
contributions’ changes (see figure 3.8).
                                                                   5
                         Change in contribution to the public good
                                             0-5




                                                                       0   1   2   3     4   5    6    7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15

                                                                                       Negative Framing             Positive Framing




        Figure 3.7 – Contribution change depending of the numbers of symbolic sanction received




                                                                                                      99


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.6 – Contribution change (t) in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel regression random effects with
clusters by group).

                                                                                                               (1)           (2)             (3)
                                                                                                             All data      Removal      Introduction
                 Framing                                                                                      0.457         1.343         -0.00153
                                                                                                             (0.669)       (0.967)         (0.870)

                 Symbolic sanctions received in t − 1                                                          0.158∗∗      0.257∗∗         0.0735
                                                                                                             (0.0756)      (0.119)         (0.0924)

                 Peers’average in t − 1                                                                       -0.113∗ ∗ ∗ -0.127∗ ∗ ∗       -0.140∗∗
                                                                                                             (0.0350)    (0.0401)          (0.0556)

                 Positive Deviation in t − 1                                                                  -0.764∗ ∗ ∗ -0.700∗ ∗ ∗       -0.838∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                             (0.0834)     (0.131)          (0.0908)

                 Negative Deviation in t − 1                                                                   0.309∗ ∗ ∗ 0.280∗ ∗ ∗        0.357∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                             (0.0752)     (0.101)          (0.107)

                 Period                                                                                       -0.246∗ ∗ ∗ -0.218∗∗          -0.276∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                             (0.0648)     (0.104)          (0.0846)

                 Sequence                                                                                     2.202∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                             (0.626)

                 Symbolic sanctions in period t − 1 × Framing                                                -0.0700       -0.0952         -0.0750
                                                                                                             (0.100)       (0.173)         (0.112)

                 _cons                                                                                        2.252∗ ∗ ∗ 1.143              6.082∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                             (0.845)     (0.910)           (1.804)
                 N                                                                                            1224         540               684
                 R2                                                                                           0.339       0.321             0.361
                 Standard errors in parentheses
                                       * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01
                                         15             10
                           Average change in contribution




                                                                   16

                                                              31         58 55
                                                5




                                                                                    123
                                                                                          141
                                                                                                       192
                                                                                                 173
                                        0




                                                                                                               144 132
                                 -5




                                                                                                                           68
                                                                                                                                60
                          -10




                                                                                                                                           16

                                                                                                                                      15
                                         -15




                                                             [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)    [-8,-2)     [-2,2]     (2,8]      (8,14]         (14,20]
                                                                                Precedent deviation from peer's average

                                                                               Negative Framing                    Positive Framing



Figure 3.8 – Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period in
Symbolic sanctions experiment.




                                                                                                100


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




Emergence of a common contribution standard ?


    We analyze whether the implementation of a disapproval rating promotes the emergence of
a contribution standard in groups. We therefore examine whether a specific level of contribution
has been chosen more frequently over time. To do this, we consider the distribution of the different
levels of contribution in each period for the different treatments.

    In the Baseline conditions, the percentage of subjects who fully contribute to the group
account is low. As illustrated in figure 3.9, the first period excluded, it is around 10 percent in
both frames. The most common behavior is free-riding (zero contribution to the public good).
Over periods, the number of subjects who adopt this behavior keeps on increasing, reaching
respectively 61 and 75 percent in the positive and in the negative frame, in the last period of the
game.

    In the Removal condition, when the disapproval rating is available initially, we observe a
relative increase in the percentage of full contributors in the positive frame, as illustrated in
figure 3.10. It even becomes the most frequently level of contribution adopted in period 4 of the
game, with 47 percent of subjects contributing fully. There is no such increase in the negative
frame where the percentage of full contributors remains below 14 percent (the first period exclu-
ded). We assume that, under these conditions, the positive frame leads to a stronger identification
of full contribution as a socially desirable behavior.

    In the Introduction condition, when sanctions are introduced, we observe that full contribu-
ting becomes the most frequent behavior, in the negative frame (over 30 percent of the subjects).
In contrast, the number of full contributors in the positive frame remains relatively low (reaching
0 percent in period 6 after the introduction of symbolic sanctions). Those results are illustrated
in figure 3.11. A possible reason is the large number of full contributors in the negative frame
in sequence 1 (without symbolic sanctions), reaching 35 percent in period 4. We state that this
relatively high percentage of full contributors demonstrates that these groups have a strong de-
sire to cooperate, without any mechanism to promote it. Conversely, under these conditions, in
the positive frame, the percentage of full contributors is relatively low (even compared to the
baseline conditions). This relatively low percentage is observed since the first period of the first
sequence, where it represents about 8 percent of the subjects adopting this behavior. This may
reflect the relatively low willingness of these groups to cooperate.

   To sum up, without symbolic disapproval, the observed dynamics are similar in both frames.
With repetition, free-riding becomes the most frequently adopted behavior. However, we argue
that the introduction of symbolic disapproval may reveal a different willingness to cooperate,
depending on the frame. In other words, the effectiveness of the disapproval rating in preventing
the tendency to free-riding is strongly influenced by the inherent willingness of the group to
cooperate.




                                                101


                                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                     Positive Baseline (seq1)                                          Positive Baseline (seq2)
         percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
        0 25 50 75 100




                                                                             0 25 50 75 100
                                 1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                     Negative Baseline (seq1)                                          Negative Baseline (seq2)
         percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
        0 25 50 75 100




                                                                             0 25 50 75 100
                                 1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                                          free rider                                 pbl[1,5]
                                                          pbl[6,10]                                  pbl[11,15]
                                                          pbl[16,19]                                 full contributor


     Figure 3.9 – Evolution of contribution categories in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Baseline).




                                  Positive disapproval (seq 1)                                         Positive Baseline (seq2)
         percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
        0 25 50 75 100




                                                                             0 25 50 75 100




                                 1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                 Negative disapproval (seq 1)                                          Negative Baseline (seq2)
         percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
        0 25 50 75 100




                                                                             0 25 50 75 100




                                 1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                                          free rider                                 pbl[1,5]
                                                          pbl[6,10]                                  pbl[11,15]
                                                          pbl[16,19]                                 full contributor


Figure 3.10 – Evolution of contribution categories in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Removal condition).




                                                                           102


                                  Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                       Positive Baseline (seq1)                                         Positive disapproval (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                                percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                               0 25 50 75 100
                                   1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                       Negative Baseline (seq1)                                        Negative disapproval (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                                percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                               0 25 50 75 100
                                   1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                                            free rider                                 pbl[1,5]
                                                            pbl[6,10]                                  pbl[11,15]
                                                            pbl[16,19]                                 full contributor


Figure 3.11 – Evolution of contribution categories in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction condition).




    To better understand the effect of framing, we analyze how it affects the perception of the
actions of others, and the stated conditional contribution.


3.4.4    What are the potential effects of the frame on perception and the stated
         conditional contributions ?

How does framing affects the perception of others’ actions ?


    We analyze how the frame impacts the perception of others’ actions ; at the end of the
experiment, we asked subjects to qualify their effects. They could be qualified as generating :
i) important losses, ii) losses, iii) no gains or losses, iv) gains and v) important gains. Answers
were transformed in order to generate a perception score. Results are presented in figure 3.12. In
order to analyze the framing effect on perception, we used an ordered logit model.

    Result 4 : The perception of others’ actions is more favorable under the positive frame.

    This result is supported by the higher percentage of subjects that qualify others’ actions as
having positive effects, generating : "gains" or "important gains". It is worth noticing that the
qualification "important gains" is only observed in the positive frame. Result 4 is also supported
by the ordered logit estimation reported in table 3.7. The dummy variable Framing has a positive
and significant effect on perception, as presented in table 3.7. To ensure that the effect of framing
on perception is not due to different levels of actual contribution, we control this effect. To do so,


                                                                             103


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




we introduce the average contributions of one subject their peers for the whole experiment. The
introduction of this variable does not decrease the framing effect. To sum up, the perception of
others’ actions is better in the positive frame. 2 .

                          How would you qualify the effect of others'actions on your gains
                       Negative Framing, 0               Negative Framing, 1       Negative Framing, 2

                                                                      14.29%            17.5% 17.5%
                            25%        25%                   25%

                                                                                     17.5%
                         9.375%                                          32.14%
                                                             28.57%                             47.5%
                                  40.63%



                        Positive Framing, 0               Positive Framing, 1       Positive Framing, 2

                             7.143%                            12.5%15.63%                 2.778%
                                  21.43%                                                        22.22%
                                                                                     27.78%
                         35.71%                                          21.88%
                                                            43.75%                              27.78%
                                      32.14%                           6.25%           19.44%
                             3.571%




                                                    Importants Losses             Losses
                                                    No gains or losses            Gains
                                                    Importants Gains
                  Graphs by Framing and Trt_order



     Figure 3.12 – Perception of others’ actions effect by treatment in Symbolic sanctions experiment


   2. The numbers describe treatments conditions : 0 refers to Baseline Conditions, 1 to Removal condition and
2 to Introduction condition.




                                                                 104


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



    Table 3.7 – Perception of others’ actions in Symbolic sanctions experiment (ordered logit analysis).

                                              (1)                     (2)                    (3)
                                      QF_Perception_Effets    QF_Perception_Effets   QF_Perception_Effets
   Framing                                   0.563∗∗                 0.662∗∗                0.721∗∗
                                            (0.262)                 (0.280)                (0.282)

   Symbolic sanctions applied                1.245∗∗                 1.093∗                 1.092∗
                                            (0.572)                 (0.588)                (0.595)

   Treatment order                           -0.645∗∗                -0.581∗                -0.742∗∗
                                            (0.313)                 (0.317)                (0.325)

   SVO_score                                                         0.499                  0.274
                                                                    (0.707)                (0.716)

   Gender                                                            -0.217                 -0.282
                                                                    (0.262)                (0.264)

   Age                                                               0.0116                 0.0143
                                                                    (0.0362)               (0.0368)

   Understanding                                                     -0.101                 -0.159
                                                                    (0.0953)               (0.0977)

   Average Peer Contributions (sum)                                                         0.0451∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                           (0.0119)
   cut1
   _cons                                     -1.055∗ ∗ ∗             -1.231                 -0.845
                                            (0.285)                 (1.085)                (1.104)
   cut2
   _cons                                     0.553∗∗                 0.398                  0.840
                                            (0.276)                 (1.084)                (1.105)
   cut3
   _cons                                     1.185∗ ∗ ∗              1.036                  1.514
                                            (0.286)                 (1.088)                (1.110)
   cut4
   _cons                                     3.810∗ ∗ ∗              3.666∗ ∗ ∗             4.296∗ ∗ ∗
                                            (0.465)                 (1.144)                (1.179)
   N                                          196                     196                    196
   Standard errors in parentheses
   * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




What are the potential effects of the frame on stated conditional contribution ?


    To analyze the impact of the frame on the stated reciprocity, at the end of the experiment,
we reproduce the questions introduced by Fosgaard et al. (2014) in order to elicit the level of
stated conditional contribution. Subjects were asked how much they would invest in the group
account to maximize group income in two situations.

    In the first situation, they were told that none of the other group members contributes. In
this situation, all the subjects and in both frames declare that they would invest nothing either.

    In the second situation, they were told that all other group members contribute their endow-
ment to the group account. In this case, a large majority of subjects, with respectively 80% in
the positive frame and 70% in the negative frame, declared that they would also fully contribute
to the group account (see figure 3.13).

    This observation suggests that subjects do not address the game strategically. The dynamics
of cooperation is strongly driven by conditional reciprocity. It gives credit to Fischbacher et

                                                        105


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




al. (2001) ’s behavioral observation, which states that the majority of subjects willingness to
cooperate depends strongly on others’ contributions. However, it is worth noticing that the
percentage of subjects who state that they will contribute fully is slightly higher in the positive
frame. Moreover, when we distinguish the results depending on the treatment conditions, we
observe that this difference in stated contribution depending on the frame is mainly due to the
Removal condition (see figure 3.14). Conversely, in the Introduction condition, the frequency of
full contributors are similar in both frames (figure 3.15).

     If we consider that stated contributions reflect reciprocity or a preference for cooperation
(Gächter et al., (forthcoming 3 ) we can conclude that framing seems to impact reciprocity. As the
percentage of stated full contributors are slightly lower in the negative frame, we can state that
the frame reduces the willingness to reciprocate. Nevertheless, under the Introduction condition,
it is worth noticing that the groups who compose the negative framing treatment had a relatively
high percentage of stated full contributors. As a consequence, we assume that these groups have a
high willingness to reciprocate. This observation provides an explanation of the relatively higher
efficiency of the disapproval rating in this treatment.

Figure 3.13 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Symbolic sanctions experiment (all data
presented in this chapter)


                                                    Positive                                              Negative
                                      100




                                                                                        100
                                      75




                                                                                        75
                             percent of frequency




                                                                               percent of frequency
                                     50




                                                                                       50
                                      25




                                                                                        25
                                      0




                                                                                        0




                                                           No contribution                            In between
                                                           Full contribution




   3. This article was presented at the ESA (Europe) conference in Dijon in September 2019. The authors
reproduced Fosgaard et al. (2014) ’s questions, and found that subjects are less likely to fully contribute under
the negative frame.




                                                                        106


                 Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Figure 3.14 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Removal
condition)


                                                  Positive                                              Negative




                                    100




                                                                                      100
                                    75




                                                                                      75
                           percent of frequency




                                                                             percent of frequency
                                   50




                                                                                     50
                                    25




                                                                                      25
                                    0




                                                                                      0
                                                         No contribution                            In between
                                                         Full contribution




Figure 3.15 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction
condition)


                                                  Positive                                              Negative
                                    100




                                                                                      100
                                    75




                                                                                      75
                           percent of frequency




                                                                             percent of frequency
                                   50




                                                                                     50
                                    25




                                                                                      25
                                    0




                                                                                      0




                                                         No contribution                            In between
                                                         Full contribution




3.4.5        Does peer pressure affect payoffs ?

    Result 5 : The availability of peer pressure increases individual payoffs.

    Result 5 is supported by the panel regression results reported in table 3.8. The dummy
variable "Symbolic sanctions" has a significant and positive effect on payoffs. This result is
mainly explained by their effects in the Introduction condition (see table 3.9).

    Moreover, in this experiment, the framing does not affect payoffs. This result is supported by
the variable Framing presented in table 3.8. When we differentiate the treatment depending on
the sequence where symbolic sanctions were introduced, we observe that it could have an effect
on the Removal condition, but it has a low significance (cf table 3.9). The absence of effect in the
Introduction condition is due to a higher contribution under the negative frame. Explanations

                                                                      107


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




which have been mentioned throughout this chapter may be one of the reasons explaining the
lack of effect when considering all the groups making up this experiment.

    To conclude, the availability of disapproving the actions of others by sending symbolic sanc-
tions, at no cost to the sender and recipient, makes it possible to increase the contributions
and, consequently, the earnings of the members of the group. The lack of effect of the Framing’
effects on contributions is due to a contradictory effect between the Removal condition and the
Introduction condition. For the former, there is a higher level of contributions in the positive
framing, while for the latter, there is a higher level of contributions in the negative framing. It
has the effect of cancelling the framing effect.

    Table 3.8 – Individual payoffs in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel regression, random effects).

                                     (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)
                                   All data      All data      All data      Without sanctions   Sanctions
             Framing               -0.0755        0.126         -0.144            -0.263           -0.998
                                   (0.526)       (0.541)       (0.574)           (0.585)          (0.763)

             Symbolic sanctions     1.584∗ ∗ ∗ 1.875∗ ∗ ∗ 1.878∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.192)    (0.272)    (0.272)

             Period                 -0.161∗ ∗ ∗ -0.162∗ ∗ ∗ -0.162∗ ∗ ∗           -0.199∗ ∗ ∗     -0.293∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0141)    (0.0141)    (0.0141)              (0.0203)        (0.0408)

             Symbolic × Framing                   -0.579        -0.588
                                                 (0.384)       (0.384)

             SVO_score                                          -1.732             -0.771          -1.932
                                                               (1.403)            (1.468)         (1.913)

             Gender                                             -0.339             -0.309          -0.108
                                                               (0.527)            (0.551)         (0.723)

             Age                                                0.0607             0.107          -0.0531
                                                               (0.0740)          (0.0777)        (0.0952)

             Understanding                                      0.210              0.352∗        0.000904
                                                               (0.192)            (0.201)         (0.261)

             _cons                  25.63∗ ∗ ∗    25.54∗ ∗ ∗    24.11∗ ∗ ∗         22.19∗ ∗ ∗      31.34∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.400)       (0.404)       (2.199)            (2.311)         (2.848)
             N                      3920          3920          3920               2560            1360
             R2                     0.035         0.036         0.044              0.046           0.017
             Standard errors in parentheses
             * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                       108


                      Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.9 – Individual payoffs discriminating for Removal and Introduction conditions in Symbolic sanctions
experiment (panel regression, random effects).

                              (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                         Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                     1.364∗           1.357∗           1.288∗              -0.764               -0.487               -0.861
                            (0.681)          (0.697)          (0.748)             (0.624)              (0.626)              (0.661)

 Symbolic sanctions          0.408            0.392            0.377              2.821∗ ∗ ∗           3.288∗ ∗ ∗           3.289∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.342)          (0.450)          (0.450)            (0.332)              (0.411)              (0.411)

 Period                     -0.197∗ ∗ ∗      -0.197∗ ∗ ∗      -0.198∗ ∗ ∗         -0.222∗ ∗ ∗          -0.222∗ ∗ ∗          -0.221∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.0214)         (0.0214)         (0.0215)            (0.0220)             (0.0220)             (0.0220)

 Symbolic × Framing                          0.0286           0.00514                                  -0.990∗              -1.006∗
                                             (0.549)          (0.549)                                 (0.514)              (0.514)

 SVO_score                                                     -1.520                                                       -2.650
                                                              (1.840)                                                      (1.645)

 Gender                                                        -0.671                                                       -0.353
                                                              (0.691)                                                      (0.610)

 Age                                                          0.134                                                         0.0588
                                                             (0.0958)                                                      (0.0932)

 Understanding                                                0.0385                                                        0.357
                                                              (0.241)                                                      (0.235)

 _cons                       25.38∗ ∗ ∗       25.39∗ ∗ ∗       23.26∗ ∗ ∗         26.37∗ ∗ ∗           26.24∗ ∗ ∗           24.51∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.557)          (0.563)          (2.826)            (0.467)              (0.463)              (2.774)
 N                           2400             2400             2400               2720                 2720                 2720
 R2                          0.053            0.053            0.066              0.038                0.043                0.060
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                 109


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.5    Discussion

     In our experiment, we reproduce Andreoni (1995) ’s frame, which states that subjects are more
willing to contribute when they perceive social interactions as generating positive externalities
than when they perceive them as generating negative externalities. We investigate whether the
frame can affect the effectiveness of mechanisms known to promote cooperation, such as symbolic
sanctions. Our data does not replicate the framing effect established by Andreoni (1995). In other
words, in this set of data, we did not find the warm glow effect. It is partly explained by three
groups in the negative frame in the Introduction condition that have a contribution level in the
first sequence (i.e. without sanctions) which is significantly higher than the other groups of the
negative frame in the Baseline conditions. Moreover, we have to conclude that the framing effect
is fragile. It is strongly dependent on groups propensity to cooperate. Once again, numerous
groups in the negative frame under the Introduction condition have a relatively high level of
contribution to the public good in the first period of the game. We state that it reflects their
inherent high willingness to cooperate, which implies that they are less sensitive to the negative
framing.

     The ability to send symbolic sanctions generally has a positive effect on the contribution to
the public good. It should be noted that this effect is stronger when the capacity to disapprove
the actions of others is introduced after subjects first experienced a sequence in which signalling
disapproval was not available. It seems important to remind that the strong effect of symbolic
sanctions on contributions observed by Masclet et al. (2003) was obtained in identical conditions,
i.e. symbolic sanctions were introduced after a sequence where they unable to disapprove others
members. Moreover, the efficiency of this disapproval rating on cooperation’s increase is strongly
dependent on groups specific willingness to cooperate.

    Contrary to Messer et al. (2013), we did not find that "cheap talk", or more precisely, the
symbolic disapproval, was less effective in the negative frame. On the contrary, symbolic sanctions
tend to have a higher effect on the negative frame under the Introduction condition. One more
time, we state that it is linked to the inherent higher propensity of the groups that compose this
treatment to cooperate. Those groups have relatively higher initial contribution and though a
relatively higher percentage of individuals that fully contribute to the public good (without any
mechanism). It may explain why they are more sensitive to the establishment of a mechanism
enabling them to express their disapproval and, in so doing, their social expectations, which leads
to relatively greater cooperation.

    Other results might help to understand the framing effect. First subjects have more difficulties
in establishing the payoffs under the negative frame. It is reflected by the lower understanding
score observed. However, the cooperation dynamics generated by the frame cannot solely be
explained by the initial difficulty in establishing gains. The comprehension test responses were
automatically displayed to ensure that subjects had the right gains in mind before starting MCV.
Moreover, we control for the comprehension score in every analysis, and it does not affect the
contribution’s dynamic.

    Furthermore, the stated conditional contribution, reveal that a large majority of subjects
announce that they would fully contribute if others did. However, we have never observed such a
level of cooperation in our voluntary contribution experiment. Besides, this latter analysis pro-
vides another interesting result, namely that the stated conditional contribution is influenced by
framing, as it is lower in the negative. This finding is consistent with the experiment of Fosgaard
et al. (2014), Gächter et al. (2017) and Gächter et al. (forthcoming) which show that the frame

                                                110


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




has an impact on the types of subjects (Fischbacher et al., 2001). Specifically, the percentage of
free-riders is higher in the take frame (i.e. when actions can only have negative externalities on
others). Moreover, Gächter et al. (forthcoming), replicating the stated conditional contribution
test defined by Fosgaard et al. (2014), find a lower percentage of stated full contributors in the
negative frame. As Gächter et al. (2017), we state that, reciprocity can be defined as a “form
of conditional cooperation : the willingness to cooperate provided others do the same.” As a
consequence, these results suggest that the frame affects the willingness to reciprocate.

    To conclude, framing shapes the perception of the game, both in the subjects’ perception of
the effects of other people’s actions, but also in the behavior they say they want to adopt in the
face of other people’s actions. It gives credence to the analysis developed by Kahneman (1992),
who considers that the way in which a situation is described strongly influences what is defined
as acceptable behavior. It invites us, in addition to economic incentives, to take better account of
how individuals perceive the problem of collective action they face, and in particular, how they
perceive the actions of others.




                                                111


             Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




References

   ALESINA, A., STANTCHEVA, S. & TESO, E. 2018. Intergenerational mobility and prefe-
rences for redistribution. American Economic Review, 108, 521-54.

   ANDREONI, J. 1995. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : the effects of positive and negative
framing on cooperation in experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1-21.

    BARRON, J. M. & GJERDE, K. P. 1997. Peer pressure in an agency relationship. Journal
of Labor economics, 15, 234-254.

   CARPENTER, J. P. 2007. The demand for punishment. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 62, 522-542.

    CARTWRIGHT, E. 2016. A comment on framing effects in linear public good games. Journal
of the Economic Science Association, 2, 73-84.

   COX, C. A. 2015. Decomposing the effects of negative framing in linear public goods games.
Economics Letters, 126, 63-65.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M. & GÄCHTER, S. 2011a. Framing and free riding : emo-
tional responses and punishment in social dilemma games. Experimental Economics, 14, 254-272.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M., GÄCHTER, S. & KABALIN, R. 2011b. Moral judgments
in social dilemmas : How bad is free riding ? Journal of Public Economics, 95, 253-264.

   DUGAR, S. 2010. Nonmonetary sanctions and rewards in an experimental coordination game.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 73, 377-386.

   DUGAR, S. 2013. Non-monetary incentives and opportunistic behavior : Evidence from a
laboratory public good game. Economic Inquiry, 51, 1374-1388.

   DUFWENBERG, M., GÄCHTER, S. & HENNIG-SCHMIDT, H. 2011. The framing of games
and the psychology of play. Games and Economic Behavior, 73, 459-478.

   FEHR, E. & GÄCHTER, S. 2002. Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature, 415, 137-140.

    FISCHBACHER, U., GÄCHTER, S. & FEHR, E. 2001. Are people conditionally coopera-
tive ? Evidence from a public goods experiment. Economics letter s, 71, 397-404.

    FOSGAARD, T. R., HANSEN, L. G. & WENGSTRÖM, E. 2014. Understanding the nature
of cooperation variability. Journal of Public Economics, 120, 134-143.

   FUJIMOTO, H. & PARK, E.-S. 2010. Framing effects and gender differences in voluntary
public goods provision experiments. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 39, 455-457.

    GÄCHTER, S., KOELLE, F. & QUERCIA, S. 2017. Reciprocity and the tragedies of main-
taining and providing the commons Nature Human Behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9),
650-656.


                                            112


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




   HOLLÄNDER, H. 1990. A social exchange approach to voluntary cooperation. The American
Economic Review, 1157-1167.

   KAHNEMAN, D. 1992. Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed feelings. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51, 296-312.

   KANDEL, E. & LAZEAR, E. P. 1992. Peer pressure and partnerships. Journal of political
Economy, 100, 801-817.

    KHADJAVI, M. & LANGE, A. 2015. Doing good or doing harm : experimental evidence on
giving and taking in public good games. Experimental Economics, 18, 432-441.

    KUZIEMKO, I., NORTON, M. I., SAEZ, E. & STANTCHEVA, S. 2015. How elastic are pre-
ferences for redistribution ? Evidence from randomized survey experiments. American Economic
Review, 105, 1478-1508.

   LINDBECK, A., NYBERG, S. & WEIBULL, J. W. 2003. Social norms and welfare state
dynamics. Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 533-542.

   MASCLET, D., NOUSSAIR, C., TUCKER, S. & VILLEVAL, M.-C. 2003. Monetary and
nonmonetary punishment in the voluntary contributions mechanism. The American Economic
Review, 93, 366-380.

    MESSER, K. D., SUTER, J. F. & YAN, J. 2013. Context effects in a negatively framed social
dilemma experiment. Environmental and Resource Economics, 55, 387-405.

    MESSER, K. D., ZARGHAMEE, H., KAISER, H. M. & SCHULZE, W. D. 2007. New hope
for the voluntary contributions mechanism : The effects of context. Journal of Public Economics,
91, 1783-1799.

  NIKIFORAKIS, N. 2010. Feedback, punishment and cooperation in public good experiments.
Games and Economic Behavior, 68, 689-702.

    OSTROM, E. 1990. Governing the commons : The evolution of institutions for collective
action, Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.

   OSTROM, E. 1992. Crafting institutions for self-governing irrigation systems., San Francisco :
ICS.

   OSTROM, E. 2000. Collective actions and evolution of social norms. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 14.

   OSTROM, E., GARDNER, R. & WALKER, J. 1994. Rules, games, and common-pool re-
sources, University of Michigan Press.

    PARK, E.-S. 2000. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : a further experimental study of framing
effects on free-riding. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 43, 405-421.

    RAMALINGAM, A., MORALES, A. J. & WALKER, J. M. 2018. Varying experimental
instructions to improve comprehension : punishment in public goods games. Journal of behavioral


                                              113


             Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




and experimental economics, 73, 66-73.

   TVERSKY, A. & KAHNEMAN, D. 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science, 211, 453-458.

   WILLINGER, M. & ZIEGELMEYER, A. 1999. Framing and cooperation in public good
games : an experiment with an interior solution. Economics letters, 65, 323-328.




                                            114


                                                           Appendices of chapter 2




3.A     Instructions

    Here are presented the translation of the experiment instructions we used. There were given
in french originally.


3.A.1    Announcement

   The experiment you are about to participate aims to study decision making.

    Please read the instructions carefully. They should help you understand the experiment. Once
all participants have read it, an experimenter will read them aloud.

   All your decisions will be treated anonymously. You will indicate your choices on the computer
you are sitting in front of.

   From now on, we ask you not to speak anymore. If you have a question, raise your hand and
an experimenter will come and answer you in private.

   Over the course of the experiment, you will accumulate earnings expressed in the experimental
currency unit (ECU).

   At the end of the experiment, your ECU will be converted into euros at a conversion rate
which is specified at the end of these instructions.

    The experiment has three parts. The attached instructions are those in Part 1. The ins-
tructions in part 2, then 3 will be distributed at the end of the previous games.




                                              115


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.A.2    Public good game

Investment game


                                  A.1.1.1 Negative Frame


   This experiment is a study of group and individual investment behavior. The instructions are
simple. If you follow them carefully and make good investment decisions, you may earn a non
negligible amount of money. The money you earn will be paid to you, in euros, at the end of the
experiment.


         MAKING CASH EARNING FROM YOUR INVESTMENT RETURN


    In the experiment you will make a series of 10 investment decisions. For each investment
decision you will be placed in a group of four other subjects (you included). The group compo-
sition will remain the same during all this game. Your investment returns will depend on the
investment decison that you and the other three members of your group make.

    Each investment decision you make will result in an investment return. Your investment
return from each decision will be turned into cash earnings. The exchange rate is 0.025. Meaning
that 100 ECU equal 2.5 euros. For example, if your investment return from one investment
decision is 30 ECU, your earnings will be 0.75 euros. If your investement return is 20 ECU, your
earnings will be 0.5 euros. In the following pages, we will describe how your investment returns
are determined.


                         THE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES


   You have been assigned to a group of 4 people. Each person will get an endowment of 20
tokens. You will have to choose how to divide your tokens between two investment opportunities :


                                1. The Individual Exchange


   Every token you invest in the Individual Exchange will yield you a return of one ECU.
However, each token you invest in the individual exchange will reduce the earnings of every
other players by 0.4 ECU.

    Example : Suppose you invested 20 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 20 ECU. However, each of the three other members of your group would have their
earnings reduced by 8 each.

    Example : Suppose you invested 10 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 10 ECU. However, each of the three other members of your group would have their
earnings reduced by 4 each.


                                              116


             Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




    Example : Suppose you invested 0 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
no return for this exchange. Likewise, the other three members of your group would not have
their earnings reduced.

   It will also be true that when the other members of your group invest in the Individual
Exchange, then your earnings will be reduced by 0.4 times their investment in the Individual
exchange. This is illustrated below :

    Example : Suppose that the other 3 members of your group invested a total of 35 tokens in
the Individual Exchange. Then this would reduce your earnings by 14 ECU.

    Example : Suppose that the other 3 members of your group invested a total of 35 tokens in
the Individual Exchange. Then this would reduce your earnings by 12 ECU.

   Example : Suppose that the other 3 members of your group invested no tokens the Individual
Exchange. Then this would not reduce your earnings at all.


                                 2. The Group Exchange


   Every token you invest in the Group Exchange yields a return of 0.4 for you. The other
menbers of your group are not affected by your investment in the Group Exchange.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest no tokens in the Group Exchange. Then your
return from the Group Exchange would be 0.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest 10 tokens in the Group Exchange. Then your
return from the Group Exchange would be 4.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest 20 tokens in the Group Exchange. Then your
return from the Group Exchange would be 8.


                                   Automatic Earnings


    In addition to the earnings you accumulate from the Individual Exchange and the Group
Exchange, you will also get automatic earnings each round. These automatic earnings will not
depend on any decisions you make, and will be the same each round. Your automatic earnings
will be 24 ECU each round. Hence, your total earnings each round will be your earnings from
the Individual Exchange plus your earnings from the Group Exchange plus 24 ECU in automatic
earnings.


                                 The Investment Decision


   Your task is to decide how many of your tokens to invest in the Individual Exchange and
how many to invest in the Group Exchange. You are free to put some tokens into the Indivudal
Exchange and some into the Group Exchange. Alternatively, you can put all of them into the
Group Exchange or all of them into the Individual Exchange.

                                            117


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                 Your Investment Account


   You and every other member of your group will get an endowment of 20 tokens every period.
The total number of tokens in each group in every period is 80.


                                    Stages of Investment


    During 10 periods, you will be asked to make investment decision. In every period, the sum
of your investment decisions has to be equal to your endowment 20 tokens.

   In every period, you will get a EARNINGS REPORT.

    This earnings report tells you the total investment in the Group Exchange, your investment
return, and your cash earnings. Your Earnings Report does not tell you the investment decisions
or earnings of the other members of your group. YOUR INVESTMENT DECISIONS AND
EARNINGS ARE CONFIDENTIAL.


                                         Your Group


   The composition of your group will remain the same during this game. In every period,
you will interact with the 3 same people.

   At no point in the experiment will the identities of the other members of the group be made
known to you, nor will your identity be made know to them.


                                    Your Cash Earnings


   Your investment return determines your earnings in euros. For example, if you get 100 ECU,
your earnings will be 2.5 euros.


                                       GOOD LUCK !




                                             118


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                  A.1.1.2. Positive Frame


   The positive frame instructions are identical to the negative frame, except for the investment
opportunities and the automatic earning.


                         THE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES


   You have been assigned to a group of 4 people. Each person will get an endowment of 20
tokens. You will have to choose how to divide your tokens between two investment opportunities :


                                 1. The Individual Exchange


   Every token you invest in the Individual Exchange will yield you a return of one ECU. The
other members of your group are not affected by your investment in the Individual Exchange.

    Example : Suppose you invested 20 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 20 ECU.

    Example : Suppose you invested 10 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 10 ECU.

   Example : Suppose you invested 0 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
no return for this exchange.


                                   2. The Group Exchange


    Your return from the Group Exhange will depend on the total number of tokens that you
and the other three members of your group invest in the Group Exchange. The more the group
invests in the Group Exchange, the greater the return to each member of the group.

   Every token invested in the Group Exchange yields a return of 0.4 for each member of the
group, not just the person who invested it.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest 0 tokens in the Group Exchange, but that the
three other members invested a total of 30 tokens. Then your return from the Group Exchange
would be 12 ECU. Everyone else in your group would also get a return of 12.

    Example : Suppose that you invested 10 tokens in the Group Exchange, but that the other
three members of the group invest 30 tokens. This makes a total of 40 tokens. Your return from
the Group Exchange would be 16. The other three members of the group would also get a return
of 16.

    Example : Suppose that you invested 20 tokens in the Group Exchange, but that the other
three members of the group invest nothing. Then you, and everyone else in the group, would get
a return from the Group Exchange of 8 .

                                              119


             Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




   As you can see, every token invested in the Group Exchange will yield a return of 0.4 for
every member of the group, not just the person who invested it. It does no matter who invests
tokens in the Group Exchange. Everyone will get a return from every token invested whether
they invest in the Group Exchange or not.




                                            120


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




Peer pressure


   During this game, you stay with the same group, you are interacting with the same people
than in the precedent game.

   The functioning of the two accounts, the conversion rate are the same than in the
precedent experiment. The earnings you will get in this game will be added to thoses of the
two precedents games.

   This experiment also has 10 periods. However, each period is composed by two stages :

   — The first stage is identical to the action you made during a period in the precedent
     experiment : you have to decide how much tokens you invest in the Individual Exchange
     and in the Group Exchange. In the same way, when all the members of your group have
     taken their decisions, the SUMMARY screen is displayed. This screen reminds you of the
     same information as in the previous section.
   — During the second stage, after having taken note of the investment decisions of each
     of the other 3 members of your group in the Group Exchange, you may decide to send
     them sanction points.

   Description of the second stage

    You get informed about the amount that each of the three other members contributed in
the Group Exchange in the first stage of the game. Please notice that the order in which the
decisions of the three other members of your group are displayed, is randomly modified every
period. Thereby, the investment of the first "Other member" which will appear on your screen,
will not be the same player each time. It will be the same for the invesments which appear in
the second and the third place.

    You have to take a decision about the number of sanction points you send to each of the
three members of your group. You can impose untill 5 sanctions points to each of your
group members every period. Likewise, every other member of your group can impose
you sanction points every period. For every subject, you must enter a value between 0 and 5
points. If you do not want to decrease the earnings of another subject, you must enter 0.

    Once all group members have made their decisions, your screen will display your total number
of sanction points received, your total sanction points sent, and the associated costs ; as well as
your gain for the period.




                                               121


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.A.3    Social Value Orientation test

   In this experiment, you have to decide how to share an amont between you and "another
person". This other person is in this room, and will be randomly selected at the end of the
experiment. You cannot identify her and she cannot identify you. All your choices are completely
confidential.

    Concretely, you have to select one between 9 distributions proposed. There are no right or
wrong answers. You have to choose the distribution you prefered. You have to make this choice
15 times through 15 screens that present differents distribution proposal.

   Once all the people present in this room, have answer the question, the computer will ran-
domly select one of the 15 propositions. This will be paid depending of your choice. The part
dedicated to the "other person" will be sent to a subject selected randomly.

   You will also receive the "Other Person" share resulting from the choices of another individual
present in this room who will also be selected randomly at the end of the game.

   The results of this experiment will be communicated to you at the end of the session, and
you will receive at that time the amount corresponding to your winnings.

    In this experiment we used an experimental currency : ECU. The ECU you accumulate during
the experiment will be converted into euros with a conversion rate of 0.025. One hundred ECU
will therefore correspond to 2.5 euros.




                                               122


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.A.4    Understanding questions

   1. How many players are they in your group (including yourself) ?
   — i. 3 players
   — ii. 4 players
   — iii. 5 players
   Answer posted : The correct answer was 4 people : you and 3 other members

    2. Do the composition of your groupe change every period ?
    — i. Right
    — ii. Wrong
    Answer posted : The correct answer was Wrong. You keep the same group during the 10
periods of this game.

   3. How many tokens do you individually have to invest every period between the Individual
Exchange and the Group Exchange ?
   — i. 20 tokens
   — ii. 80 tokens
   — iii. It depends on previous periods
   Answer posted : Every period you must invest 20 tokens between the Group account and the
Individual account.

    4. If none of the four members of your group (including you) invest in the Group account,
and therefore each member invests 20 tokens in the Individual account : What is your return on
investment for the period ?
    — i. 0 ECU
    — ii. 20 ECU
    — iii. 24 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * 0 = 0 ecu. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 20 = 20 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 0
+ 20 = 20 ECU.

   Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * 0 = 0 ecu. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 20 - 0.4 * (20 * 3) = -4 ECU. In addition, each period you
benefit from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 0 - 4 +
24 = 20 ECU.

    5. If each of the four members of your group (including you) invests 20 tokens in the Group
account, and therefore no member invests in the individual account : What is your return on
investment for the period ?
    — i. 0 ECU
    — ii. 20 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (20 * 4) = 32
ECU. Via the Individual account you get 1 * 0 = 0 ECU. Your return on investment for the
period is 32 + 0 = 32 ECU.

   Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (20) = 8 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 0 - 0.4 * 0 = 0 ecu. In addition, each period you benefit
from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 8 + 0 + 24 =

                                              123


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




32 ECU.

    6. If the sum of the investments in the group account of the other 3 members is 30 tokens,
and therefore 30 tokens in the individual account ; What do you decide to invest 0 tokens in the
Group account and 20 tokens in the individual account : What is your return on investment for
the period ?
    — i. 20 ECU
    — ii. 26 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (30) = 12 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 20 = 20 ECU. Your return on investment for the period
is 20 + 12 = 32 ECU.

    Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (0) = 0 ECU. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 20 - 0.4 * 30 = 8 ECU. In addition, each period you benefit
from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 0 + 8 + 24 =
32 ECU.

    7. If the sum of the investments in the group account of the other 3 members is 30 tokens,
and therefore 30 tokens in the individual account ; that you decide to invest 20 tokens in the
Group account and 0 tokens in the individual account : What is your return on investment for
the period ?
    — i. 20 ECU
    — ii. 26 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (20 + 30) = 20
ECU. Via the Individual account you get 1 * 0 = 0 ecu. Your return on investment for the period
is 20 + 0 = 20 ECU.

    Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * 20 = 8 ECU. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 0 - 0,4 * 30 = -12 ECU. In addition, each period you benefit
from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 8 - 12 + 24 =
20 ECU.

    8. If the sum of the investments in the group account of the other 3 members is 30 tokens,
and therefore 30 tokens in the individual account ; you invest 10 tokens in the Group account
and 10 in the Individual account : What is your return on investment for the period ?
    — i. 20 ECU
    — ii. 26 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (40) = 16 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 10 = 10 ECU. Your return on investment for the period
is 16 + 10 = 26 ECU.

   Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (10) = 4 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 10 - 0,4 * 30 = -2 ECU. In addition, each period you
benefit from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment is 4 - 2 + 24 = 26 ECU.




                                              124


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.B     Characteristics of Experimental Sessions for symbolic sanc-
        tions experiment

   Table 3.B.1 – Characteristics of experimental sessions in Symbolic sanction experiment

  Session Number    Number of Subjects   Number of groups      Framing    Periods 1-10   Periods 11-20
        3 (7)              16                   4              Negative     Baseline       Sanction
        5 (9)              12                   3              Negative     Baseline       Sanction
       13 (22)             12                   3              Negative     Baseline       Sanction
       7 (13)              16                   4              Negative    Sanction        Baseline
       13 (21)             12                   3              Negative    Sanction        Baseline
        1 (5)              16                   4              Positive     Baseline       Sanction
        2 (6)              8                    2              Positive     Baseline       Sanction
        4 (8)              12                   3              Positive     Baseline       Sanction
       6 (12)              16                   4              Positive    Sanction        Baseline
       12 (20)             16                   4              Positive    Sanction        Baseline
       8 (14)              16                   4              Negative     Baseline       Baseline
       9 (15)              16                   4              Negative     Baseline       Baseline
       10 (16)             16                   4              Positive     Baseline       Baseline
       11 (17)             12                   3              Positive     Baseline       Baseline



3.C     Description of demographics variables for symbolic sanctions
        experiment

   Looking at gender and age there are no differences between frames (chi2 tests). Futhermore,
there are no differences between frames concerning the social value orientations of subjects (ttest,
Epps Singleton).

          Table 3.C.1 – Gender summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment

        Treatment                  Number of women                             Chi 2 p-value
                                   Negative Framing     Positive Framing
        Baseline Treatment         15(/32)              15(/28)                0.605
        Introduction condition     23(/40)              18(/36)                0.512
        Removal condition          13(/28)              11(/32)                0.342
        All data                   51(/100)             44(/96)                0.469

            Table 3.C.2 – Age summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment

        Treatment                  Framing     Obs    Mean       Std. Dev.        t-test
        Baseline Treatment         Negative    32     22.375       3.37       non-significant
                                   Positive    28     21.82        2.48
        Introduction condition     Negative    40     22.25        3.37       non-significant
                                   Positive    36     22.83        3.69
        Removal condition          Negative    28     23.03        4.48       non-significant
                                   Positive    32     23.12        3.79
        All data                   Negative    100     22.51       3.69       non-significant
                                   Positive    96     22.63        3.42


                                                125


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



        Table 3.C.3 – SVO_score summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment

    Treatment                          Framing                 Obs        Mean              Std. Dev.                  Epps Singleton p-value
    Baseline Treatment                 Negative                32         0.506               0.194                       non significant
                                       Positive                28         0.523               0.182
    Introduction condition             Negative                40         0.484               0.183                          non significant
                                       Positive                36         0.462               0.197
    Removal condition                  Negative                28         0.509               0.155                          non significant
                                       Positive                32         0.454               0.212
    All data                           Negative                100        0.498               0.178                          non significant
                                       Positive                96         0.488               0.198

        Table 3.C.4 – SVO type summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment

          Treatment                             Framing                  Prosocial               Individualist                Competitive
          Baseline Treatment                    Negative                    14                        17                          1
                                                Positive                    15                        13                          0
          Introduction condition                Negative                    17                        23                          0
                                                Positive                    14                        22                          0
          Removal condition                     Negative                    15                        12                          1
                                                Positive                    11                        18                          3
          All data                              Negative                    46                        52                          2
                                                Positive                    40                        53                          3


                                           Negative framing                                     Positive framing
                              50




                                                                               50
                              45




                                                                               45
                              40




                                                                               40
                              35




                                                                               35
                                  30




                                                                                   30
                          Frequency




                                                                           Frequency
                             25




                                                                              25
                              20




                                                                               20
                              15




                                                                               15
                              10




                                                                               10
                              5




                                                                               5
                              0




                                                                               0




                                       3   4      5       6    7     8                  0   2         4            6     8
                                               Understanding                                     Understanding




     Figure 3.C.1 – Distribution of understanding score by framing in Symbolic sanction experiment




   Looking at the understanding score obtained by framing, we clearly see that the negative
frame leads to lower understanding level. The difference is significant according to the ttest and
Epps-Singleton test. The higher complexity of this game, with more source of earnings can be
an explanation of the lower understanding score.




                                                                     126


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



      Table 3.C.5 – Understanding summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment

    Treatment                 Framing     Obs       Mean   Std. Dev.   Epps Singleton p-value
    Baseline Treatment        Negative    32        5.40     1.29              0.003
                              Positive    28        6.60     1.39
    Introduction condition    Negative    40        5.35     1.16              0.030
                              Positive    36        6.19     1.41
    Removal condition         Negative    28        4.82     1.21              0.001
                              Positive    32        5.93     1.68
    All data                  Negative    100       5.22     1.23
                              Positive    96        6.22     1.51              0.000


3.D     Non parametrics tests for symbolic sanctions experiment

   Mann Whitney’s tests that compare the framing effect for given conditions (under a defined
condition and sequence).

           Table 3.D.1 – Mann Whitney analysis in Symbolic sanction experiment

                            Treatment                           Mann Whitney p-value
           Baseline Treatment     Sequence      1   Baseline    0.121
                                  Sequence      2   Baseline    0.685
           Introduction condition Sequence      1   Baseline    0.186
                                  Sequence      2   Sanctions   0.034**
           Removal condition      Sequence      1   Sanctions   0.355
                                  Sequence      2   Baseline    0.418

    Wilcoxon tests that compare the contributions between Sequence 1 and Sequence 2 for a
given treatment.

               Table 3.D.2 – Wilcoxon analysis in Symbolic sanction experiment

                                Treatment                       Wilcoxon p-value
                Baseline Treatment     Negative Framing         0.017**
                                       Positive Framing         0.237
                Introduction condition Negative Framing         0.446
                                       Positive Framing         0.767
                Removal condition      Negative Framing         0.018**
                                       Positive Framing         0.012**




                                                127


                  Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.E      Robutness check for symbolic sanctions experiment

3.E.1     Supplementary analysis for symbolic sanctions experiment

Table 3.E.1 – Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanction experiment(panel regressions
random effects with clusters by groups).

                                   (1)        (2)          (3)                (4)                (5)
                               All_data    All_data     All_data       Without_Sanction   Symbolic sanction
         Framing                 -0.126      0.198        0.110              0.231             -1.724
                                (1.067)     (1.073)      (1.061)            (1.070)           (1.665)

         Symbolic sanctions      2.638∗ ∗ ∗ 3.106∗ ∗ ∗ 3.117∗ ∗ ∗
                                (0.516)     (0.772)    (0.771)

         Period                  -0.269∗ ∗ ∗ -0.271∗ ∗ ∗ -0.271∗ ∗ ∗        -0.332∗ ∗ ∗        -0.541∗ ∗ ∗
                                (0.0344)    (0.0343)    (0.0343)           (0.0468)           (0.0836)

         Symbolic × Framing                   -0.934      -0.908
                                             (1.039)     (1.040)

         SVO_score                                        6.619∗ ∗ ∗         6.546∗ ∗ ∗         4.750∗∗
                                                         (1.875)            (2.099)            (2.331)

         Gender                                           1.584∗ ∗ ∗         1.287∗∗            2.387∗ ∗ ∗
                                                         (0.569)            (0.622)            (0.869)

         Age                                             -0.111             -0.0776             -0.164
                                                        (0.0836)           (0.0852)            (0.131)

         Understanding                                    0.310              0.189              0.651
                                                         (0.267)            (0.253)            (0.488)

         _cons                   9.381∗ ∗ ∗ 9.236∗ ∗ ∗ 6.006∗∗               6.690∗∗            12.56∗ ∗ ∗
                                (0.825)     (0.833)    (2.901)              (3.019)            (4.852)
         N                       3920        3920       3920                 2560               1360
         R2                      0.067       0.070      0.112                0.108              0.059
         Standard errors in parentheses
         * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                       128


                      Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.E.2 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction
conditions in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel regressions random effects with clusters by groups).

                              (1)              (2)               (3)                      (4)                      (5)                  (6)
                         Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl        Introduction + Bsl       Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                     2.274∗           2.264∗            2.216∗                  -0.825                   -0.825               -1.028
                            (1.278)          (1.272)           (1.203)                 (1.142)                  (1.142)              (1.096)

 Symbolic sanctions          0.668            0.647                0.680                5.463∗ ∗ ∗               5.463∗ ∗ ∗          5.496∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.631)          (0.594)              (0.584)              (1.213)                  (1.213)             (1.209)

 Period                     -0.329∗ ∗ ∗      -0.329∗ ∗ ∗          -0.326∗ ∗ ∗           -0.369∗ ∗ ∗              -0.369∗ ∗ ∗         -0.371∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.0513)         (0.0514)             (0.0511)              (0.0572)                 (0.0572)            (0.0573)

 Symbolic × Framing                          0.0377                0.101                -1.601                   -1.601              -1.576
                                             (0.898)              (0.888)              (1.497)                  (1.497)             (1.503)

 SVO_score                                                         8.917∗ ∗ ∗                                                        6.994∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (2.435)                                                           (2.189)

 Gender                                                            0.924                                                             1.814∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.672)                                                           (0.689)

 Age                                                              0.0129                                                             -0.203∗∗
                                                                 (0.0968)                                                           (0.0928)

 Understanding                                                     0.229                                                             0.267
                                                                  (0.269)                                                           (0.271)

 _cons                       8.977∗ ∗ ∗       8.982∗ ∗ ∗           2.517                10.41∗ ∗ ∗               10.41∗ ∗ ∗          9.104∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.902)          (0.901)              (3.409)              (1.022)                  (1.022)             (3.319)
 N                           2400             2400                 2400                 2720                     2720                2720
 R2                          0.103            0.103                0.159                0.076                    0.086               0.140
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




Table 3.E.3 – Individual contributions to the group account without interaction variable in Symbolic sanction
experiment (panel regressions random effects with clusters by groups).

                                                          (1)             (2)                        (3)
                                                       All data      Removal + Bsl          Introduction + Bsl
                             Framing                    -0.207           2.241∗                    -1.481
                                                       (1.047)          (1.190)                   (1.060)

                             Symbolic sanction          2.662∗ ∗ ∗           0.734                     4.752∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.515)              (0.623)                   (0.922)

                             period                     -0.269∗ ∗ ∗          -0.326∗ ∗ ∗               -0.371∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.0344)             (0.0511)                  (0.0572)

                             SVO_score                  6.655∗ ∗ ∗           8.911∗ ∗ ∗                7.058∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (1.879)              (2.442)                   (2.220)

                             Gender                     1.601∗ ∗ ∗           0.922                     1.845∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.569)              (0.672)                   (0.684)

                             Age                        -0.112               0.0130                    -0.208∗∗
                                                       (0.0835)             (0.0967)                  (0.0934)

                             Understanding              0.314                0.229                     0.281
                                                       (0.267)              (0.269)                   (0.272)

                             _cons                      6.133∗∗              2.507                     9.295∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (2.902)              (3.400)                   (3.321)
                             N                          3920                 2400                      2720
                             R2                         0.110                0.159                     0.131
                             Standard errors in parentheses
                             * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                     129


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.E.4 – Individual contributions to the group account without interaction variable in Symboolic sanction
experiment (panel tobit estimation random effects).

                                                     (1)       (2)                 (3)
                                                  All data   Removal         Introduction
                             Framing               -0.708     3.615∗∗            -2.929∗∗
                                                  (1.370)    (1.769)            (1.405)

                             Symbolic sanctions    5.306∗ ∗ ∗ 1.766∗∗           8.905∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.436)     (0.780)          (0.717)

                             period                -0.530∗ ∗ ∗ -0.604∗ ∗ ∗      -0.708∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.0323)    (0.0487)         (0.0486)

                             SVO_score             15.02∗ ∗ ∗ 19.95∗ ∗ ∗        14.90∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (3.450)     (4.438)          (3.596)

                             Gender                3.502∗ ∗ ∗ 2.337             3.877∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (1.293)     (1.659)          (1.331)

                             Age                   -0.222     -0.0371           -0.347∗
                                                  (0.181)     (0.230)          (0.203)

                             Understanding         0.556       0.413            0.419
                                                  (0.472)     (0.581)          (0.513)

                             _cons                 2.080       -4.295           7.674
                                                  (5.382)     (6.777)          (6.040)
                             sigma_u
                             _cons                 8.598∗ ∗ ∗ 8.627∗ ∗ ∗        7.197∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.507)     (0.658)          (0.513)
                             sigma_e
                             _cons                 10.05∗ ∗ ∗ 9.534∗ ∗ ∗        9.825∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.188)     (0.230)          (0.215)
                             N                     3920        2400             2720
                             Standard errors in parentheses
                             * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




3.E.2     Contribution dynamics taking into account the group’s initial contri-
          bution for symbolic sanctions experiment

   The variable "Initial group contribution" represents the group’s contribution to the public
good in the first period of the first sequence.




                                                      130


                 Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.E.5 – Panel regressions of individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the
group in Symbolic sanction experiment (random effects, cluster by group, first period of sequence 1 excluded).

                                    (1)                (2)            (3)              (4)                 (5)
                                 All_data       Without_Sanction   Sanction       Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl
    Framing                        1.036              1.295         0.0461            1.737∗              0.137
                                  (0.925)            (0.936)        (1.774)          (1.015)             (0.887)

    Symbolic sanctions            3.046∗ ∗ ∗                                          0.345              5.576∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.797)                                             (0.562)            (1.227)

    Period                        -0.255∗ ∗ ∗        -0.320∗ ∗ ∗    -0.489∗ ∗ ∗      -0.322∗ ∗ ∗         -0.374∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.0368)           (0.0477)       (0.0949)         (0.0514)            (0.0582)

    Initial group contribution     0.129∗ ∗ ∗         0.149∗ ∗ ∗     0.117∗∗         0.135∗ ∗ ∗          0.110∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.0294)           (0.0309)       (0.0458)         (0.0436)            (0.0260)

    Symbolic × Framing            -0.754                                              0.601              -1.541
                                 (1.072)                                             (0.922)            (1.558)

    SVO_score                     5.067∗ ∗ ∗          4.752∗ ∗ ∗    4.437∗∗           7.453∗ ∗ ∗         4.964∗∗
                                 (1.617)             (1.812)       (2.076)           (2.178)            (2.044)

    Gender                        1.279∗∗             0.952∗        2.191∗ ∗ ∗        0.537              1.443∗∗
                                 (0.524)             (0.552)       (0.836)           (0.672)            (0.613)

    Age                           -0.100             -0.0626        -0.164          -0.00109             -0.186∗∗
                                 (0.0798)           (0.0728)       (0.130)          (0.0917)            (0.0858)

    Understanding                 0.130             -0.00418        0.480             0.156             0.00321
                                 (0.252)             (0.232)       (0.447)           (0.278)            (0.270)

    _cons                         1.485               1.396         7.397             -1.828             6.365∗
                                 (2.963)             (2.593)       (5.981)           (3.092)            (3.283)
    N                             3724                2424          1300               2340              2644
    R2                            0.173               0.168         0.110             0.202              0.192
    Standard errors in parentheses
    * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                            131


                 Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.E.6 – Panel tobit estimation of individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution
of the group in Symbolic sanction experiment (random effects, first period of sequence 1 excluded).

                                    (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)                  (5)
                                 All_data       Without_Sanction   Sanction       Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl
    Framing                        1.490              2.003          -0.547           2.575               -0.438
                                  (1.336)            (1.322)        (2.175)          (1.716)             (1.359)

    Symbolic sanctions            5.938∗ ∗ ∗                                          1.799∗             9.909∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.626)                                             (1.028)            (0.889)

    Symbolic × Framing            -1.188                                              0.600              -2.241∗∗
                                 (0.883)                                             (1.254)            (1.084)

    Period                        -0.512∗ ∗ ∗        -0.607∗ ∗ ∗    -1.047∗ ∗ ∗      -0.565∗ ∗ ∗         -0.690∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.0349)           (0.0484)       (0.113)          (0.0515)            (0.0508)

    Initial group contribution     0.229∗ ∗ ∗         0.264∗ ∗ ∗     0.219∗ ∗ ∗      0.246∗ ∗ ∗          0.183∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.0394)           (0.0404)       (0.0612)         (0.0642)            (0.0382)

    SVO_score                     12.22∗ ∗ ∗          12.53∗ ∗ ∗    9.401∗            16.89∗ ∗ ∗         10.93∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (3.239)             (3.307)       (5.073)           (4.237)            (3.340)

    Gender                        2.953∗∗             2.795∗∗       4.259∗∗           1.613              3.092∗∗
                                 (1.205)             (1.230)       (1.910)           (1.572)            (1.216)

    Age                           -0.201              -0.134        -0.303           -0.0605             -0.315∗
                                 (0.168)             (0.172)       (0.252)           (0.216)            (0.184)

    Understanding                 0.222               -0.117        1.043             0.284             -0.0647
                                 (0.442)             (0.450)       (0.694)           (0.548)            (0.474)

    _cons                         -6.016              -6.310        5.703             -12.41∗            3.225
                                 (5.176)             (5.286)       (7.950)           (6.705)            (5.557)
    sigma_u
    _cons                         7.916∗ ∗ ∗          7.854∗ ∗ ∗    10.27∗ ∗ ∗        8.074∗ ∗ ∗         6.445∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.479)             (0.518)       (0.827)           (0.623)            (0.474)
    sigma_e
    _cons                         10.05∗ ∗ ∗          9.156∗ ∗ ∗    10.39∗ ∗ ∗        9.512∗ ∗ ∗         9.810∗ ∗ ∗
                                 (0.194)             (0.218)       (0.352)           (0.233)            (0.217)
    N                             3724                2424          1300              2340               2660
    Standard errors in parentheses
    * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                            132


                                                                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.E.3                         Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions expe-
                              riment


                                                                    Negative Framing, 141            Negative Framing, 142            Negative Framing, 143            Negative Framing, 144
                                                   0 20 40 60
        Contribution by group Baseline treatment




                                                                    Negative Framing, 161            Negative Framing, 162            Negative Framing, 163            Negative Framing, 164
                                                   0 20 40 60




                                                                    Positive Framing, 151            Positive Framing, 152            Positive Framing, 153            Positive Framing, 154
                                                   0 20 40 60




                                                                                                                                                                   0       5    10    15       20

                                                                    Positive Framing, 171            Positive Framing, 172            Positive Framing, 173
                                                   0 20 40 60




                                                                0       5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20

                                                                                                             Periods from 1 to 20
                                                   Graphs by Framing and NUM_Groupe



                                                                       Figure 3.E.1 – Average contribution over time by group (Baseline).




                                                                                                                         133


                                                                          Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                                                          Negative Framing, 71            Negative Framing, 72            Negative Framing, 73             Negative Framing, 74             Negative Framing, 91



                                                        20 40 60 80
         Contribution by group Introduction treatment
                                                        0




                                                                          Negative Framing, 92            Negative Framing, 93            Negative Framing, 221            Negative Framing, 222            Negative Framing, 223
                                                        20 40 60 80
                                                        0




                                                                          Positive Framing, 51            Positive Framing, 52             Positive Framing, 53             Positive Framing, 54             Positive Framing, 61
                                                        20 40 60 80
                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                        0       5    10    15       20

                                                                          Positive Framing, 62            Positive Framing, 81             Positive Framing, 82             Positive Framing, 83
                                                        20 40 60 80
                                                        0




                                                                      0      5    10    15       20   0      5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20

                                                                                                                             Periods from 1 to 20
                                                        Graphs by Framing and NUM_Groupe



Figure 3.E.2 – Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction
condition).




                                                                                                                                             134


                                                                   Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                                                                       Negative Framing, 131            Negative Framing, 132            Negative Framing, 133            Negative Framing, 134


                                                   0 20 40 60 80
         Contribution by group Removal treatment



                                                                       Negative Framing, 211            Negative Framing, 212            Negative Framing, 213            Positive Framing, 121
                                                   0 20 40 60 80




                                                                       Positive Framing, 122            Positive Framing, 123            Positive Framing, 124            Positive Framing, 201
                                                   0 20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                                                                      0       5    10    15       20

                                                                       Positive Framing, 202            Positive Framing, 203            Positive Framing, 204
                                                   0 20 40 60 80




                                                                   0       5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20

                                                                                                                Periods from 1 to 20
                                                   Graphs by Framing and NUM_Groupe



Figure 3.E.3 – Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions experiment (Removal condi-
tion).




                                                                                                                            135


                  Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.E.4     Without the highly cooperative groups for symbolic sanctions expe-
          riment

Table 3.E.7 – Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel regression
with clusters by groups, cooperative groups excluded).

                                  (1)        (2)          (3)                 (4)               (5)
                               All_data   All_data     All_data        Without_Sanction   Symbolic sanction
         Framing                 0.805      1.115        1.202               1.321            -0.0102
                                (0.975)    (0.972)      (0.933)             (0.935)           (1.624)

         Symbolic sanctions      2.582∗ ∗ ∗ 3.090∗ ∗ ∗ 3.098∗ ∗ ∗
                                (0.559)     (0.920)    (0.919)

         Period                 -0.258∗ ∗ ∗ -0.257∗ ∗ ∗ -0.257∗ ∗ ∗         -0.313∗ ∗ ∗        -0.518∗ ∗ ∗
                               (0.0364)    (0.0365)    (0.0366)            (0.0460)           (0.0876)

         Symbolic × Framing                   -0.929      -0.903
                                             (1.148)     (1.149)

         SVO_score                                        7.476∗ ∗ ∗         7.783∗ ∗ ∗         5.334∗∗
                                                         (1.740)            (1.884)            (2.211)

         Gender                                           1.250∗∗            1.022∗             1.832∗∗
                                                         (0.527)            (0.523)            (0.913)

         Age                                              -0.0967           -0.0625             -0.153
                                                         (0.0830)          (0.0822)            (0.132)

         Understanding                                   0.0950            -0.0197              0.285
                                                         (0.248)           (0.226)             (0.457)

         _cons                   8.351∗ ∗ ∗ 8.182∗ ∗ ∗ 5.537∗                5.893∗∗            12.54∗ ∗ ∗
                                (0.652)     (0.669)    (2.877)              (2.950)            (4.839)
         N                       3680        3680       3680                 2440               1240
         R2                      0.067       0.069      0.116                0.110              0.069
         Standard errors in parentheses
         * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                       136


                      Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.E.8 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction
conditions in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel regression with clusters by groups, cooperative groups exclu-
ded).

                              (1)              (2)              (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)
                         Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                     2.274∗           2.264∗           2.216∗              0.385                0.385                0.356
                            (1.278)          (1.272)          (1.203)             (0.982)              (0.982)              (0.937)

 Symbolic sanctions          0.668            0.647            0.680              5.615∗ ∗ ∗           5.615∗ ∗ ∗           5.639∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.631)          (0.594)          (0.584)            (1.599)              (1.599)              (1.588)

 Period                     -0.329∗ ∗ ∗      -0.329∗ ∗ ∗      -0.326∗ ∗ ∗         -0.338∗ ∗ ∗          -0.338∗ ∗ ∗          -0.339∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.0513)         (0.0514)         (0.0511)            (0.0556)             (0.0556)             (0.0558)

 Symbolic × Framing                          0.0377            0.101              -2.074               -2.074               -2.057
                                             (0.898)          (0.888)            (1.827)              (1.827)              (1.826)

 SVO_score                                                     8.917∗ ∗ ∗                                                   8.025∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (2.435)                                                      (2.036)

 Gender                                                        0.924                                                        1.520∗∗
                                                              (0.672)                                                      (0.683)

 Age                                                          0.0129                                                        -0.183∗∗
                                                             (0.0968)                                                      (0.0909)

 Understanding                                                 0.229                                                       0.0347
                                                              (0.269)                                                      (0.283)

 _cons                       8.977∗ ∗ ∗       8.982∗ ∗ ∗       2.517              8.955∗ ∗ ∗           8.955∗ ∗ ∗           8.146∗∗
                            (0.902)          (0.901)          (3.409)            (0.752)              (0.752)              (3.321)
 N                           2400             2400             2400               2480                 2480                 2480
 R2                          0.103            0.103            0.159              0.049                0.058                0.124
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                 137


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.E.9 – Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel tobit
estimation, cooperative groups excluded).

                                       (1)        (2)          (3)               (4)              (5)
                                     All data   All data     All data      Without sanction   Sanctions
               Framing                0.954      1.457        1.692             1.987           -0.591
                                     (1.340)    (1.372)      (1.370)           (1.398)         (2.050)

               Symbolic sanctions     5.022∗ ∗ ∗ 5.798∗ ∗ ∗ 5.827∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.438)    (0.644)    (0.642)

               Period                 -0.499∗ ∗ ∗ -0.498∗ ∗ ∗ -0.499∗ ∗ ∗       -0.591∗ ∗ ∗    -0.979∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0319)    (0.0319)    (0.0319)          (0.0452)       (0.0983)

               Symbolic × Framing                 -1.440∗     -1.401
                                                 (0.871)     (0.869)

               SVO_score                                      16.42∗ ∗ ∗        17.96∗ ∗ ∗      11.22∗∗
                                                             (3.298)           (3.466)         (5.002)

               Gender                                         2.907∗∗           3.042∗∗         3.427∗
                                                             (1.245)           (1.306)         (1.902)

               Age                                            -0.195            -0.130          -0.269
                                                             (0.170)           (0.179)         (0.241)

               Understanding                                  0.191            -0.0489          0.610
                                                             (0.454)           (0.475)         (0.690)

               _cons                  7.519∗ ∗ ∗ 7.247∗ ∗ ∗ 1.024               0.955           14.06∗
                                     (1.026)    (1.038)    (5.085)             (5.349)         (7.259)
               sigma_u
               _cons                  8.715∗ ∗ ∗ 8.702∗ ∗ ∗ 7.963∗ ∗ ∗          8.152∗ ∗ ∗      9.820∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.529)    (0.528)    (0.490)             (0.549)         (0.790)
               sigma_e
               _cons                  9.715∗ ∗ ∗ 9.710∗ ∗ ∗ 9.712∗ ∗ ∗          9.118∗ ∗ ∗      9.645∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.185)    (0.185)    (0.185)             (0.215)         (0.323)
               N                      3680       3680       3680                2440            1240
               Standard errors in parentheses
               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                       138


                      Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.E.10 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction
conditions in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation, cooperative groups excluded).

                              (1)              (2)              (3)                  (4)                 (5)                  (6)
                         Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                     3.543∗∗          3.488∗           3.528∗∗             -0.673               0.156                0.159
                            (1.802)          (1.833)          (1.799)             (1.393)              (1.408)              (1.363)

 Symbolic sanctions          1.612∗∗          1.504            1.595              8.072∗ ∗ ∗           9.832∗ ∗ ∗           9.899∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.782)          (1.022)          (1.019)            (0.720)              (0.951)              (0.944)

 Period                     -0.609∗ ∗ ∗      -0.609∗ ∗ ∗      -0.604∗ ∗ ∗         -0.628∗ ∗ ∗          -0.626∗ ∗ ∗          -0.629∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.0487)         (0.0487)         (0.0487)            (0.0470)             (0.0469)             (0.0468)

 Symbolic × Framing                           0.205            0.327                                   -3.205∗ ∗ ∗          -3.210∗ ∗ ∗
                                             (1.261)          (1.257)                                 (1.122)              (1.116)

 SVO_score                                                     19.96∗ ∗ ∗                                                   16.51∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (4.437)                                                      (3.323)

 Gender                                                        2.344                                                        3.317∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (1.659)                                                      (1.240)

 Age                                                          -0.0373                                                       -0.299
                                                              (0.230)                                                      (0.182)

 Understanding                                                 0.413                                                       0.0308
                                                              (0.581)                                                      (0.477)

 _cons                       8.331∗ ∗ ∗       8.358∗ ∗ ∗       -4.258             9.203∗ ∗ ∗           8.782∗ ∗ ∗           5.483
                            (1.417)          (1.427)          (6.777)            (1.074)              (1.074)              (5.501)
 sigma_u
 _cons                       9.521∗ ∗ ∗       9.520∗ ∗ ∗       8.624∗ ∗ ∗         7.372∗ ∗ ∗           7.286∗ ∗ ∗           6.290∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.716)          (0.716)          (0.658)            (0.547)              (0.542)              (0.481)
 sigma_e
 _cons                       9.532∗ ∗ ∗       9.532∗ ∗ ∗       9.534∗ ∗ ∗         9.357∗ ∗ ∗           9.340∗ ∗ ∗           9.343∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.230)          (0.230)          (0.230)            (0.210)              (0.210)              (0.210)
 N                           2400             2400             2400               2480                 2480                 2480
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




3.F        Diff and Diff analysis for symbolic sanctions experiment

   Syb_sanc_Seq1 and Syb_sanc_Seq2 are dummy variables which are equal to 1 whenever
symbolic sanction are introduced respectively in sequence 1 or 2.




                                                                 139


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.F.1 – DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 1 in the positive frame
(panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                                                               (1)         (2)
                                                               pbl         pbl
                               Syb_sanc_Seq1          -0.695         1.443
                                                                     (3.067)
                                                      (2.977)
                                   Sequence           -2.677∗ ∗ ∗    -2.684∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (0.988)
                                                      (0.988)
                              Symbolic sanctions      5.476∗ ∗ ∗     5.469∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (1.396)
                                                      (1.396)
                                  SVO_score                          17.25∗∗
                                                                     (7.092)

                                    Gender                           4.550
                                                                     (2.882)

                                     Age                             -0.0797
                                                                     (0.427)

                                Understanding                        -0.105
                                                                     (0.896)

                                    _cons             5.992∗ ∗ ∗     -3.066
                                                      (2.159)        (12.15)
                                   sigma_u
                                     _cons            10.79∗ ∗ ∗     10.13∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (1.135)        (1.077)
                                   sigma_e
                                    _cons             10.57∗ ∗ ∗     10.57∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (0.369)        (0.369)
                                      N               1200           1200
                              Standard errors in parentheses
                              * p<0.10, ** p<0.05 ,*** p<0.01




                                                         140


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.F.2 – DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 1 in the negative frame
(panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                                                               (1)         (2)
                                                               pbl         pbl
                               Syb_sanc_Seq1          -0.981         0.227
                                                                     (1.912)
                                                      (2.356)
                                   Sequence           -3.699∗ ∗ ∗    -3.703∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (0.835)
                                                      (0.836)
                              Symbolic sanctions      3.725∗ ∗ ∗     3.734∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (1.231)
                                                      (1.232)
                                  SVO_score                          31.64∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (5.456)

                                    Gender                           -0.285
                                                                     (1.798)

                                     Age                             -0.166
                                                                     (0.227)

                                Understanding                        2.188∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                     (0.745)

                                    _cons             3.968∗∗        -20.02∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (1.598)        (7.242)
                                   sigma_u
                                     _cons            8.371∗ ∗ ∗     6.236∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (0.919)        (0.728)
                                   sigma_e
                                    _cons             9.327∗ ∗ ∗     9.323∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (0.312)        (0.312)
                                      N               1200           1200
                              Standard errors in parentheses
                              * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                         141


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.F.3 – DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 2 in the positive frame
(panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects)

                                                              (1)         (2)
                                                              pbl         pbl
                               Syb_sanc_Seq2         -3.042         -1.739
                                                                    (1.690)
                                                     (1.874)
                                   Sequence          -2.502∗ ∗ ∗    -2.507∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (0.862)
                                                     (0.862)
                              Symbolic sanctions     3.262∗ ∗ ∗     3.270∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (1.147)
                                                     (1.147)
                                 SVO_score                          14.66∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (4.390)

                                   Gender                           3.295∗∗
                                                                    (1.656)

                                     Age                            -0.467∗
                                                                    (0.247)

                                Understanding                       -0.345
                                                                    (0.584)

                                    _cons            6.435∗ ∗ ∗     9.475
                                                     (1.406)        (7.862)
                                   sigma_u
                                     _cons           6.699∗ ∗ ∗     5.563∗ ∗ ∗
                                                     (0.699)        (0.607)
                                   sigma_e
                                    _cons            9.303∗ ∗ ∗     9.309∗ ∗ ∗
                                                     (0.285)        (0.285)
                                      N              1280           1280
                              Standard errors in parentheses
                              * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        142


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.F.4 – DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 2 in the negative frame
(panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects)

                                                           (1)           (2)
                                                           pbl           pbl
                               Syb_sanc_Seq2         5.759∗ ∗ ∗    5.767∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (2.095)
                                                     (2.211)
                                   Sequence          -4.024∗ ∗ ∗   -4.030∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (1.009)
                                                     (1.010)
                              Symbolic sanctions     6.978∗ ∗ ∗    6.986∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (1.336)
                                                     (1.337)
                                 SVO_score                         13.68∗∗
                                                                   (5.412)

                                   Gender                          3.167
                                                                   (1.991)

                                     Age                           -0.132
                                                                   (0.295)

                                Understanding                      1.106
                                                                   (0.834)

                                    _cons            3.428∗∗       -8.021
                                                     (1.654)       (8.850)
                                   sigma_u
                                     _cons           8.420∗ ∗ ∗    7.801∗ ∗ ∗
                                                     (0.830)       (0.780)
                                   sigma_e
                                    _cons            11.24∗ ∗ ∗    11.23∗ ∗ ∗
                                                     (0.353)       (0.353)
                                      N              1440          1440
                              Standard errors in parentheses
                              * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        143


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.F.5 – DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 2 in the negative frame
when cooperative groups are excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                                                         (1)             (2)
                                                         pbl             pbl
                               Syb_sanc_Seq2     1.685             2.133
                                                                   (1.990)
                                                 (2.149)
                                  Sequence       -3.845∗ ∗ ∗       -3.852∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (0.918)
                                                 (0.918)
                                  Syb_sanc       7.557∗ ∗ ∗        7.566∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (1.314)
                                                 (1.314)
                                 SVO_score                         17.02∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (5.067)

                                   Gender                          2.672
                                                                   (1.851)

                                     Age                           -0.0946
                                                                   (0.261)

                               Understanding                       0.389
                                                                   (0.803)

                                   _cons         3.759∗∗           -6.121
                                                 (1.478)           (8.178)
                                  sigma_u
                                    _cons        7.490∗ ∗ ∗        6.655∗ ∗ ∗
                                                 (0.820)           (0.744)
                                  sigma_e
                                   _cons         10.25∗ ∗ ∗        10.24∗ ∗ ∗
                                                 (0.340)           (0.340)
                                     N           1200              1200
                               t statistics in parentheses
                               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                      144


                     Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.G        Number of symbolic sanctions sent by sequence

3.G.1         Propensity to send symbolic sanction

Table 3.G.1 – Subject’s i propensity to send symbolic sanctions to subject j (probit estimation with cluster
by suject).

                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)          (6)
                                                       All data    All data    Removal       Removal      Introduction Introduction
                        Framing                         -0.414∗ ∗ ∗ -0.408∗ ∗ ∗ -0.258∗∗      -0.279∗∗        -0.553∗ ∗ ∗  -0.503∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.104)      (0.104)     (0.130)      (0.130)         (0.167)      (0.172)

      (absolute) Negative Deviation yj − yi < 0          0.150∗ ∗ ∗ 0.139∗ ∗ ∗ 0.146∗ ∗ ∗ 0.138∗ ∗ ∗          0.163∗ ∗ ∗      0.149∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.0168)    (0.0170)   (0.0218)   (0.0224)           (0.0287)        (0.0291)

              Positive Deviation yj − yi > 0            -0.0671∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0520∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0619∗ ∗ ∗-0.0513∗∗      -0.0759∗ ∗ ∗    -0.0575∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.0114)     (0.0135)     (0.0181)     (0.0219)      (0.0134)        (0.0158)

                    Own contribution                    -0.0876∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0779∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0870∗ ∗ ∗-0.0799∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0918∗ ∗ ∗      -0.0790∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.00858) (0.00975)       (0.0125)     (0.0144)     (0.0133)         (0.0159)

                         Period                        -0.00713     0.000271       -0.0121   -0.00769       -0.00386        0.00737
                                                       (0.0127)     (0.0138)      (0.0168)   (0.0179)       (0.0191)        (0.0215)

                        Sequence                         0.344∗∗         0.278
                                                        (0.166)         (0.171)

                           Age                          0.0142       0.0137       0.00727    0.00634         0.0176          0.0193
                                                       (0.0159)     (0.0157)      (0.0211)   (0.0207)       (0.0233)        (0.0239)

                         Gender                          -0.182          -0.184   -0.0798    -0.0790         -0.291∗∗        -0.293∗
                                                        (0.113)         (0.112)   (0.162)    (0.159)        (0.148)         (0.150)

                       SVO_score                         -0.109         -0.0990    0.297      0.269          -0.484          -0.427
                                                        (0.253)         (0.251)   (0.336)    (0.338)        (0.353)         (0.355)

                     Understanding                     -0.00432     -0.00464       -0.0641    -0.0621        0.0666          0.0652
                                                       (0.0406)     (0.0403)      (0.0562)   (0.0556)       (0.0478)        (0.0493)

  Positive deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j > 0                 -0.0232∗∗                -0.0163                        -0.0259∗
                                                                    (0.0105)                 (0.0153)                       (0.0147)

  Negative deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j < 0                 0.0121                  0.00854                         0.0147
                                                                    (0.0114)                 (0.0156)                       (0.0175)

                         _cons                           0.717           0.616     0.890      0.854          0.873           0.531
                                                        (0.464)         (0.470)   (0.635)    (0.626)        (0.700)         (0.781)
                           N                             3720            3720      1800       1800           1920            1920
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                  145


               Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.G.2     Number of symbolic sanctions sent by deviation level




                              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                   Average symbolic sanctions sent
                                                                                                                                               11




                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                   36 30
                                                                       13                                              61
                                                                                                           57
                                                                                  30           72
                                                                                                    64                      60


                                                                                                                 125
                                                                                       21

                                                                            12




                                                                      [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)     [-2,2]      (2,8]       (8,14]      (14,20]
                                                                                             Deviation level from peer average

                                                                                         Negative Framing                   Positive Framing




        Figure 3.G.1 – Number of symbolic sanctions sent by deviation level (Removal condition).
                              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15




                                                                                                                                               10
                                   Average symbolic sanctions sent




                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                   36
                                                                                                                                        37
                                                                                                                       95
                                                                                  38                100          91         80
                                                                                               67
                                                                                                           136
                                                                       18              36




                                                                            6


                                                                      [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)     [-2,2]      (2,8]       (8,14]      (14,20]
                                                                                             Deviation level from peer average

                                                                                         Negative Framing                   Positive Framing




    Figure 3.G.2 – Number of symbolic sanctions sent by deviation level (Introduction condition).




                                                                                                          146


                 Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.H       Number of symbolic sanctions received by sequence

3.H.1         Symbolic sanctions received in Removal conditions




                                                   9     8
                               Number of sanction received
                               5       6        7  4




                                                                           0                  2                   4                6                         8                 10
                                                                                                                       Period
                                                                                                         Positive Framing                   Negative Framing




        Figure 3.H.1 – Evolution of the number of symbolic sanctions received (Removal condition).



                                                                               13 12     30             72 64
                                10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                               Percentage disapproved by deviation level




                                                                                                                        57
                                                                                                  21



                                                                                                                                                        36            11
                                                                                                                                       61                        30



                                                                                                                             125

                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                   0




                                                                           [-20,-14)     [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]                        (14,20]
                                                                                               Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                                   Negative Framing                          Positive Framing




Figure 3.H.2 – Likelihood of being disapproved by deviation level (with number of observations in Removal
condition).
                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15




                                                                               13

                                                                                         30
                                  Average punishment points received




                                                                                    12
                                                                                                  21    72
                                                                                                             64


                                                                                                                        57



                                                                                                                             125
                                                                                                                                       61               36 30         11
                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                                           8




                                                                           [-20,-14)     [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]                        (14,20]
                                                                                               Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                                   Negative Framing                          Positive Framing




Figure 3.H.3 – Average number of symbolic sanctions received from deviation level (with number of observa-
tions in Removal condition).



                                                                                                                  147


                 Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.H.2         Symbolic sanctions received in Introduction conditions




                                                    10    9
                                Number of sanction received
                                 6      7        8  5




                                                                            10            12               14                 16                  18              20
                                                                                                                   Period
                                                                                                     Positive Framing               Negative Framing




      Figure 3.H.4 – Evolution of the number of symbolic sanctions received (Introduction condition).



                                                                             18   6     38 36       67
                                 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                                         100             91
                                Percentage disapproved by deviation level




                                                                                                                   136               80

                                                                                                                               95
                                                                                                                                                       37
                                                                                                                                                36          10 10
                                                    0




                                                                            [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]               (14,20]
                                                                                              Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                               Negative Framing                      Positive Framing




Figure 3.H.5 – Likelihood of being disapproved by deviation level (with number of observations in Introduction
condition).
                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15




                                                                             18
                                                                                  6
                                                                                        38
                                   Average punishment points received




                                                                                             36
                                                                                                    67
                                                                                                         100




                                                                                                                         91
                                                                                                                   136


                                                                                                                               95
                                                                                                                                     80         36 37            10
                                                                                                                                                            10




                                                                            [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]               (14,20]
                                                                                              Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                               Negative Framing                      Positive Framing




Figure 3.H.6 – Average number of symbolic sanctions received by deviation level (with number of observations
in Introduction condition).




                                                                                                               148


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.I     Contribution’s change for symbolic sanctions experiment




                                       20          10 15
                          Average change in contribution         11

                                                                       25 19
                                             5
                                                            13                     64 55
                                                                                              53 113
                                       0



                                                                                                              57
                                                                                                         54
                                                                                                                     36 25
                       -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                                      8

                                                                                                                                  7
                                       -20




                                                           [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)    [-8,-2)     [-2,2]     (2,8]      (8,14]      (14,20]
                                                                              Precedent deviation from peer's average

                                                                             Negative Framing                 Positive Framing



Figure 3.I.1 – Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period
in Symbolic sanction experiment (Removal condition).
                                       20          10 15
                          Average change in contribution




                                                            18   5
                                                                       33 36       59
                                             5




                                                                                        86
                                                                                                    79
                                                                                              120
                                       0




                                                                                                         90 75
                       -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                     32
                                                                                                                          35

                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                  8
                                       -20




                                                           [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)    [-8,-2)     [-2,2]     (2,8]      (8,14]      (14,20]
                                                                              Precedent deviation from peer's average

                                                                             Negative Framing                 Positive Framing



Figure 3.I.2 – Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period
in Symbolic sanction experiment (Introduction condition).




                                                                                             149


                  Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.I.1 – Contribution change (t) in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel analysis random effects with
clusters by group).

                                                                      (1)           (2)             (3)
                                                                    All data      Removal      Introduction
             Framing                                                 0.481         1.581          -0.0811
                                                                    (0.678)       (1.020)         (0.855)

             Symbolic santions received in t − 1                      0.153∗∗      0.270∗∗        0.0520
                                                                    (0.0773)      (0.126)        (0.0936)

             Peers’average in t − 1                                  -0.131∗ ∗ ∗ -0.177∗ ∗ ∗      -0.165∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (0.0385)    (0.0551)         (0.0620)

             Positive Deviation in t − 1                             -0.784∗ ∗ ∗ -0.748∗ ∗ ∗      -0.858∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (0.0807)     (0.122)         (0.0867)

             Negative Deviation in t − 1                              0.327∗ ∗ ∗ 0.304∗ ∗ ∗       0.383∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (0.0733)    (0.0991)         (0.106)

             Period                                                  -0.254∗ ∗ ∗ -0.246∗∗         -0.291∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (0.0647)     (0.105)         (0.0874)

             Sequence                                                2.119∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                    (0.638)

             Symbolic santions received in period t − 1 × Framing   -0.0723        -0.149        -0.0428
                                                                    (0.102)       (0.177)        (0.114)

             SVO_score                                               2.973∗ ∗ ∗ 3.792∗            2.504∗
                                                                    (1.003)     (1.965)          (1.301)

             Age                                                     -0.0230       0.0359         -0.0785
                                                                    (0.0543)      (0.0882)       (0.0550)

             Gender                                                  0.873∗        0.567          1.148∗
                                                                    (0.483)       (0.738)        (0.628)

             Understanding                                           0.166         0.400         -0.0851
                                                                    (0.194)       (0.298)        (0.238)

             _cons                                                   0.358         -3.264         7.065∗
                                                                    (2.051)       (2.479)        (3.605)
             N                                                       1224           540            684
             R2                                                      0.348         0.338          0.371
             Standard errors in parentheses
             * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                       150


                       Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.I.2 – Contribution change (t) by type in Symbolic sanction experiment, with interaction variable
(panel analysis random effects with clusters by group).

                                                         High_Contributors (xt−1
                                                                             i   − xt−1
                                                                                    −i > 0)             Low_Contributors (xt−1
                                                                                                                           i   − xt−1
                                                                                                                                  −i ≤ 0)
                                                         All data Removal      Introduction             All data Removal     Introduction
  Framing                                                 0.161           1.086           0.200          1.567       2.646          0.754
                                                         (0.628)         (0.807)         (0.939)        (1.291)     (1.949)        (1.620)

  Symbolic santions received in t − 1                     0.101           0.141          0.0957          0.276∗∗     0.382∗∗        0.190
                                                         (0.105)         (0.154)         (0.154)        (0.113)     (0.187)        (0.143)

  Peers’average in t − 1                                  -0.0905         -0.158∗         -0.0570        -0.296∗ ∗ ∗ -0.268∗ ∗ ∗    -0.352∗ ∗ ∗
                                                         (0.0653)        (0.0831)        (0.0998)       (0.0611)    (0.0986)       (0.105)

  Deviation in t − 1                                      -0.811∗ ∗ ∗ -0.806∗ ∗ ∗         -0.798∗ ∗ ∗    -0.463∗ ∗ ∗ -0.458∗ ∗ ∗    -0.484∗ ∗ ∗
                                                         (0.105)      (0.184)            (0.109)        (0.0728)     (0.108)       (0.108)

  Period                                                  -0.387∗ ∗ ∗ -0.491∗ ∗ ∗         -0.320∗∗       -0.265∗ ∗ ∗ -0.101         -0.418∗ ∗ ∗
                                                         (0.0977)     (0.161)            (0.134)        (0.100)      (0.123)       (0.155)

  Sequence                                                3.235∗ ∗ ∗                                     2.458∗∗
                                                         (1.232)                                        (0.965)

  Symbolic santions received in period t − 1 × Framing   -0.0531         0.0326           -0.210         -0.179      -0.186         -0.181
                                                         (0.163)         (0.194)         (0.229)        (0.145)     (0.230)        (0.143)

  _cons                                                   3.511∗∗         4.052∗          5.517∗∗        2.765∗∗    0.0752          9.389∗ ∗ ∗
                                                         (1.402)         (2.117)         (2.558)        (1.376)     (1.175)        (3.508)
  N                                                        587             250             337            637         290            347
  R2                                                      0.233           0.238           0.240          0.115       0.142          0.104
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




3.J         Emergence of a common contribution standard with symbolic
            sanctions

3.J.1        Full contributors for symbolic sanctions experiment

Table 3.J.1 – Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 1 of Symbolic sanction experiment.
                       Treatment Framing : period          1        2       3       4     5        6    7     8     9      10
                 Baseline treatment          Negative      25       16      9       9     3        6    9     3     6      6
                                             Positive      32       21      11      14    11       4    4     14    0      7
                 Introduction condition      Negative      33       28      33      35    28       23   23    18    18     10
                                             Positive      8        17      17      6     3        3    11    0     3      6
                 Removal condition           Negative      29       21      11      11    14       11   14    7     11     14
                                             Positive      25       31      38      47    38       34   34    31    22     22




Table 3.J.2 – Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 2 of Symbolic sanction experiment.
                       Treatment Framing : period          11       12      13      14    15       16   17    18    19     20
                 Baseline treatment          Negative      13       13      6       9     9        6    3     3     13     6
                                             Positive      18       14      7       11    18       11   11    7     7      11
                 Introduction condition      Negative      38       43      35      33    35       30   33    33    28     15
                                             Positive      19       14      11      8     6        0    3     3     8      8
                 Removal condition           Negative      14       11      4       4     4        7    4     4     4      4
                                             Positive      38       22      25      28    22       16   13    3     3      3




                                                                    151


                                  Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.J.2    Free riders for symbolic sanctions experiment

   Table 3.J.3 – Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 1 of Symbolic sanction experiment.
                                  Treatment Framing : period               1    2             3              4      5     6    7    8    9    10
                            Baseline treatment              Negative       22   22            28             38     31    41   50   41   41   50
                                                            Positive       11   21            11             21     21    36   50   36   36   46
                            Introduction condition          Negative       13   15            20             18     30    20   35   25   38   58
                                                            Positive       33   28            19             36     39    39   33   50   42   67
                            Removal condition               Negative       14   18            25             32     25    36   43   36   43   46
                                                            Positive       16   22            28             25     28    22   25   31   44   47




   Table 3.J.4 – Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 2 of Symbolic sanction experiment.
                                  Treatment Framing : period               11   12            13             14     15    16   17   18   19   20
                            Baseline treatment              Negative       38   34            44             47     53    41   47   56   56   75
                                                            Positive       29   32            29             36     32    36   39   43   43   61
                            Introduction condition          Negative       10   5             3              13     18    20   25   28   48   63
                                                            Positive       22   17            22             28     33    42   36   53   56   75
                            Removal condition               Negative       36   39            54             46     64    54   54   61   54   50
                                                            Positive       25   34            38             44     50    44   44   53   47   72




                                       Positive Baseline (seq1)                                                    Positive Sanction (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                                      percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                     0 25 50 75 100




                                   1    2   3   4   5   6    7   8     9   10                                11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                       Negative Baseline (seq1)                                                   Negative Sanction (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                                      percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                                     0 25 50 75 100




                                   1    2   3   4   5   6    7   8     9   10                                11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                                              free rider                                         pbl[1,5]
                                                              pbl[6,10]                                          pbl[11,15]
                                                              pbl[16,19]                                         full contributor


Figure 3.J.1 – Evolution of contribution categories in Symboolic sanction experiment (Introduction condition,
cooperative groups excluded).




                                                                                152


                 Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




3.K       Payoffs complementary analysis for symbolic sanctions ex-
          periment

   Table 3.K.1 presents panel regression on payoffs without the interaction variable Framing ×
Sanction.

Table 3.K.1 – Panel regression of individuals payoffs in Symbolic sanction experiment, without the interaction
variable, random effects.

                                                    (1)       (2)                 (3)
                                                 All data   Removal         Introduction
                            Framing               -0.349     1.289∗             -1.150∗
                                                 (0.561)    (0.733)            (0.662)

                            Symbolic sanctions    1.583∗ ∗ ∗ 0.379             2.815∗ ∗ ∗
                                                 (0.193)     (0.343)          (0.332)

                            Period                -0.161∗ ∗ ∗ -0.198∗ ∗ ∗      -0.221∗ ∗ ∗
                                                 (0.0141)    (0.0215)         (0.0220)

                            SVO_score             -1.709      -1.520           -2.609
                                                 (1.410)     (1.832)          (1.691)

                            Gender                -0.328      -0.671           -0.334
                                                 (0.529)     (0.688)          (0.627)

                            Age                   0.0597       0.134           0.0558
                                                 (0.0744)    (0.0954)         (0.0958)

                            Understanding         0.212      0.0385            0.365
                                                 (0.193)     (0.240)          (0.242)

                            _cons                 24.20∗ ∗ ∗ 23.26∗ ∗ ∗        24.63∗ ∗ ∗
                                                 (2.208)     (2.814)          (2.850)
                            N                     3920        2400             2720
                            R2                    0.042       0.066            0.055
                            Standard errors in parentheses
                            * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




3.L      Others potential effects of the frame for symbolic sanctions
         experiment

3.L.1     Judgment complementary analysis for symbolic sanctions experiment

     At the end of the experiment, subjects had to describe their perceptions concernning the effect
of others’actions on their own payoff. They could qualify them as generating :"i) important losses,
ii) losses, iii) no gains or losses, iv) gains and v) important gains". These perception score compose
the following variable "QF_Perception_Effects". In table 4.L.2 we pool the results into three
levels : 1) losses, 2) no gains or losses, 3) gains to generate a perception score "QF Perception
Effects2". Symbolic sanctions applied is a dummy variable that is equal to one when material
sanctions were available during the experiment. Average Peer Contributions (sum) represents
the average sum of contributions from the subject’s peers (other group members).




                                                     153


                   Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Table 3.L.1 – Perception of others actions in Symbolic sanction experiment (ordered logit analysis, perception
is reduced to 3 levels).

                                              (1)                        (2)                      (3)
                                     QF_Perception_Effects2     QF_Perception_Effects2   QF_Perception_Effects2
 Framing                                     0.698∗∗                    0.782∗∗                  0.880∗ ∗ ∗
                                            (0.281)                    (0.308)                  (0.314)

 Symbolic sanctions applied                  1.298∗∗                    1.197∗                   1.237∗
                                            (0.600)                    (0.622)                  (0.644)

 Treatment order                             -0.708∗∗                   -0.656∗                  -0.818∗∗
                                            (0.333)                    (0.340)                  (0.356)

 SVO_score                                                              0.822                    0.606
                                                                       (0.763)                  (0.778)

 Gender                                                                 -0.289                   -0.375
                                                                       (0.285)                  (0.292)

 Age                                                                    0.0133                   0.0173
                                                                       (0.0388)                 (0.0401)

 Understanding                                                         -0.0684                   -0.119
                                                                       (0.105)                  (0.108)

 Average Peer Contributions (sum)                                                                0.0451∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                (0.0133)
 cut1
 _cons                                       0.611∗∗                    0.824                    1.346
                                            (0.298)                    (1.172)                  (1.225)
 cut2
 _cons                                       1.247∗ ∗ ∗                 1.468                    2.027∗
                                            (0.309)                    (1.175)                  (1.230)
 N                                            196                        196                      196
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




3.L.2      Strategic understanding for symbolic sanctions experiment

   In order to get a better idea of subjects the level of strategical understanding, we replicate
Fosgaard et al.(2014) final questionnary at the end of the experiment.

    There are two kinds of questions, representing two kinds of objectives. The first type of ques-
tion asks what ould be their contribution in order to maximize their own payoffs (a). The second
type of question asks what would be their contribution in order to maximize the group earning
(b). For both objectives, they were presented with two situations concerning the contribution of
the other members of the group.

    As a result, it seems that subjects do not get the strategical aspect of the game. Indeed, their
behavior seem to be driven by reciprocity. All the subjects in the two frames declare that they
will not contribute to the public good if others do not contribute for both objectives (individual
and group maximization).

   Conversely, in both frames a majority of subjects declare that they will fully contribute to
the public good if other’s are full contributors. These results corroborate the fact that subjects
behave as conditionnal cooperators.



                                                          154


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




   Nevertheless, it seems that the frame also impacts their stated willingness to reciprocate to
others’ contributions. The percentage of subjects who declare that they will fully contribute is
lower in the negative frame.

   The questions specified that they had to answer how much they will contribute to public
good when there were no sanctions that could be delivered :

    a) To maximize individual earning, if others fully contribute :

Figure 3.L.1 – Stated contributions declared if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoff
in Symbolic sanction experiment (all data presented in this chapter)


                                                   Positive                                              Negative
                                     100




                                                                                       100
                                     75




                                                                                       75
                            percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
                                    50




                                                                                      50
                                     25




                                                                                       25
                                     0




                                                                                       0




                                                          No contribution                            In between
                                                          Full contribution




Figure 3.L.2 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoff in Symbolic
sanction experiment (Removal conditions)


                                                   Positive                                              Negative
                                     100




                                                                                       100
                                     75




                                                                                       75
                            percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
                                    50




                                                                                      50
                                     25




                                                                                       25
                                     0




                                                                                       0




                                                          No contribution                            In between
                                                          Full contribution




                                                                       155


                Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Figure 3.L.3 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoff in Symbolic
sanction experiment (Introduction conditions)


                                                   Positive                                              Negative




                                     100




                                                                                       100
                                     75




                                                                                       75
                            percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
                                    50




                                                                                      50
                                     25




                                                                                       25
                                     0




                                                                                       0
                                                          No contribution                            In between
                                                          Full contribution




Figure 3.L.4 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in
Symbolic sanction experiment (Introduction conditions cooperative groups excluded)


                                                   Positive                                              Negative
                                     100




                                                                                       100
                                     75




                                                                                       75
                            percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
                                    50




                                                                                      50
                                     25




                                                                                       25
                                     0




                                                                                       0




                                                          No contribution                            In between
                                                          Full contribution




    b) To maximize group earning, if others fully contribute :




                                                                       156


                     Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing



Figure 3.L.5 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize group payoff in Symbolic
sanction experiment (Introduction conditions, cooperative groups excluded)


                                                             Positive                                              Negative




                                             100




                                                                                                 100
                                             75




                                                                                                 75
                                    percent of frequency




                                                                                        percent of frequency
                                            50




                                                                                                50
                                             25




                                                                                                 25
                                             0




                                                                                                 0
                                                                    No contribution                            In between
                                                                    Full contribution




Table 3.L.2 – Percentage by stated contribution to maximize group payoff when others fully
contribute in Symbolic sanction experiment
 Data considered             All   data                          Removal                   Introduction                       Introduction without cooperative groups
                       Positive     Negative               Positive Negative            Positive Negative                     Positive Negative
 No contribution       8.33         16                     9.38      21.43              5.56      12.50                       5.56      14.29
 In between            11.46        14                     6.25      14.29              13.89     10.00                       13.89     10.71
 Full contribution     80.21        70                     84.38     64.29              80.56     77.50                       80.56     75.00



Table 3.L.3 – Percentage by stated contribution to maximize individual payoff when others fully
contribute in Symbolic sanction experiment
 Data considered             All   data                          Removal                   Introduction                       Introduction without cooperative groups
                       Positive     Negative               Positive Negative            Positive Negative                     Positive Negative
 No contribution       21.88        28.00                  21.88     21.43              19.44     30.00                       19.44     32.14
 In between            13.54        15.00                  15.63     17.86              11.11     10.00                       11.11     10.71
 Full contribution     64.58        57.00                  62.50     60.71              69.44     60.00                       69.44     57.14



Table 3.L.4 – Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the conditionnal contribution answer comparing the
two frames in Symbolic sanction experiment

 Data considered                                                                           Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
                                                                               To maximize individual gain To maximize group gain
 All data presented in this chapter                                            0.941                       0.687
 When symbolic sanctions are applied                                           1.000                       0.864
 All data cooperative groups are excluded                                      0.067*                      0.019**



3.L.3      Framing effect by subjects’type for symbolic sanctions experiment

    Although the number of observations is quite small compared to Park (2000)’s experiment
(cf table 5.B.5), I made some statistical tests.



                                                                                 157


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




Mann Whitney test on the average contribution by type for symbolic sanctions
experiment


   The average contribution rate is defined as follows the average contribution by subject and
by sequence. This is the observation used to run these tests.

    The difference of behavior depending on the frame in baseline conditions is only signifi-
cant for individualist subjects. This seems to corroborate Park (2000)’s argument that they
are sensitive to framing and that is the main driver of the different dynamics. Nevertheless, it
seems that these differences of behavior do not persist during the second sequence of the Baseline
treatment.

    However, in this set of data under symbolic sanction condition, individualist subjects
contribute more under the negative framing than under the positive one. This runs counter
to the findings in the literature and to our own results when considering the data set (of these
two chapters). When we remove the highly cooperative groups, we do not find this effect any
longer.

Table 3.L.5 – Mann Whitney analysis of the average contribution by subjects types in Symbolic
sanction experiment

                             Treatment                                    Mann Whitney p-value by Type
                                                                          Prosocial Individualist
 Baseline Treatment                             Sequence   1   Baseline   0.930     0.071*
                                                Sequence   2   Baseline   0.162     0.834
 Symbolic sanctions   Introduction conditions   Sequence   1   Baseline   0.937     0.006***
                                                Sequence   2   Symbolic   0.068*    0.001***
                      Removal conditions        Sequence   1   Symbolic   0.058*    0.204
                                                Sequence   2   Baseline   0.102     0.115


Table 3.L.6 – Mann Whitney analysis of the average contribution by subjects types in Symbolic
sanction experiment, excluding cooperative groups

                             Treatment                                    Mann Whitney p-value by Type
                                                                          Prosocial Individualist
 Symbolic sanctions   Introduction conditions   Sequence   1   Baseline   0.571     0.183
                                                Sequence   2   Symbolic   0.396     0.041*
                      Removal conditions        Sequence   1   Symbolic   0.058*    0.204
                                                Sequence   2   Baseline   0.102     0.115




                                                 158


              Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




Mann Whitney test on the average contribution by type in the first period of each
sequence for symbolic sanctions experiment

Table 3.L.7 – Mann Whitney analysis of contribution in the first period by types in Symbolic
sanction experiment

                             Treatment                                    Mann Whitney p-value by Type
                                                                          Prosocial Individualist
 Baseline Treatment                             Sequence   1   Baseline   0.823     0.206
                                                Sequence   2   Baseline   0.340     0.776
 Symbolic sanctions   Introduction conditions   Sequence   1   Baseline   0.109     0.010***
                                                Sequence   2   Symbolic   0.872     0.026**
                      Removal conditions        Sequence   1   Symbolic   0.728     0.560
                                                Sequence   2   Baseline   0.491     0.031**


Table 3.L.8 – Mann Whitney analysis excluding cooperative groups on the first period contri-
bution in Symbolic sanction experiment

                             Treatment                                    Mann Whitney p-value by Type
                                                                          Prosocial Individualist
 Symbolic sanctions   Introduction conditions   Sequence 1 Baseline       0.248     0.157
                                                Sequence 2 Symbolic       0.402     0.239




                                                 159


Chapter 2 : Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing




                               160


         Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing
                                                                                            4
This chapter is based on joint work with and Katherine Farrow, David Masclet and Marc
Willinger




                                           Abstract


Robust evidence demonstrates the effectiveness of peer punishment in encouraging cooperation
in public good games. However, little is known concerning the robustness of this mechanism to
contextual changes. We investigate whether peer sanctioning is equally effective in promoting co-
operation, when strategic interactions are negatively framed rather than positively framed as in
the standard presentation of the public good game. We rely on Andreoni (1995) ’s experimental
design and introduce monetary sanctions in the negative and positive frames. In the absence of
peer-punishment, we replicate previous findings of the framing effect, i.e. lower group contribu-
tions under negative than under positive framing. When peer punishment is feasible, we observe
nearly full group cooperation under positive framing. On the contrary, under negative framing,
the average group contributions remain stable at around 45%. Slightly more punishment points
are inflicted under negative framing. However, we do not observe differences in sanctioning mo-
tives between frames : the same determinants are observed in both frames. We suggest that the
lower cooperation observed under negative framing despite the availability of punishment is due
to the lower effectiveness of received punishment points than under positive framing.

   Keywords : cooperation, public good, framing, peer punishment.




                                              161


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.1     Introduction

    How to promote and maintain cooperation in order to produce public goods, stays one of the
most debated economic issues. Advances in behavioral and experimental economics showed that
subjects contribute between 40 and 60 percent of their endowments to the public good in the
early periods of a repeated public good game, thus contradicting standard economic predictions.
Nevertheless, contributions decrease with repetition of the game, reaching nearby zero, tending
to confirm the Nash prediction (Chaudhuri, 2011). Various mechanisms were identified to prevent
the tendency to free ride, and doing so, to overcome the under-provision of public goods. There
are based on approval and disapproval such as communication (Ostrom et al., 1994), peer pressure
(Masclet et al., 2003) and peer punishment (Fehr & Gächter, 2000) and rewards (Sefton et al.,
2007). Among all these mechanisms, punishment seems to be the strongest device to promote
cooperation.

    However, little is known about the robustness of punishment mechanisms with respect to
institutional changes. Evidence has shown that subjects’ perception about the collective action
issue, more particularly about the functioning of the resource or the public good and actions of
others, influences their willingness to cooperate. In other words, when they have a poor perception
of how the resource or collective game works, and the impact of others’ actions on it, they are less
likely to support the implementation of actions/policies for the well-being of all (Ostrom, 1990 ;
Kuziemko et al., 2015 ; Alesina et al., 2018). The way the voluntary contribution mechanism
(VCM), is framed, i.e. formulated ceteris paribus, affects individual and group contributions
(Andreoni, 1995 ; Cox, 2015 ; Cubitt et al., 2011 ; Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ; Fosgaard et al., 2014 ;
Fujimoto & Park, 2010 ; Khadjavi & Lange, 2015 ; Park, 2000). The reason seems to be that
framing affects subjects’ perception of the social dilemma that underlies the VCM and therefore,
their willingness to cooperate. This aspect has great relevance to team production, where there
is reason to believe that how individuals perceive the dynamics of collective production and the
actions of team members can influence their response to peer punishment and thus the dynamics
of the group.

    In this paper, we investigate whether the framing of the VCM affects the effectiveness of peer
punishment to promote cooperation among group members. Does the way the collective issue is
framed influence the capacity of the group to generate and maintain a high level of contribution
to the public good when material sanctions can be inflicted ? We conjecture that if subjects
interpret the actions of others as having positive externalities on themselves, they will be more
inclined to cooperate, but also to bear the cost of punishment in order to foster collective action ;
than if they interpret them as having negative externalities.

    We add a new perspective to the existing literature by testing the role of framing as defined
by Andreoni (1995), rather than the "give and take frame", on the effectiveness of sanctions. As
discussed in Cartwright (2016) the "positive versus negative" framing is distinct from the Give
and Take Frame with respect to three aspects : i) the initial allocation of the endowment, ii) the
choice presented to subject and iii) the way externalities generated are presented. In the Give
(Take) frame, the endowment is initially allocated in the private (public) account, and subjects
have to decide how much they transfer to the public (private) account. Their choices, therefore,
increase (decrease) the amount in the public account in the Give (Take) frame.

     Andreoni (1995) ’s frame is valence framing, more precisely a goal frame as defined by Levin et
al. (1998). In one case, it presents the positive consequences of doing an action ; and in the other,
the negative ones of not doing this action or of doing the alternative action. In both frames, the

                                                162


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




set of actions and their impact on payoffs are strictly identical. Players’ initial endowments are
not allocated in any account. In both the positive and the negative frame, they individually have
to decide the amount they invest in the public account and the private account. The sum of these
two amounts has to be equal to their endowment. Frames only differ in the way the consequences
of each choice are described. In the positive frame, investing in the public account is presented
as having a positive impact on other players’ payoffs, whereas in the negative frame investing
in one’s private account is presented as having a negative impact on other players’ payoffs 1 .
Experiments based on "positive vs negative" framing, i.e. Andreoni (1995), Park (2000) and
Fujimoto and Park (2010), found that the contribution level is higher in the positive frame
than in the negative one. According to Andreoni (1995), the difference comes from the fact that
individuals prefer doing good to others than prevent from doing bad. The strength of the "warm
glow" effect is higher than the "cold-prickle" to induce cooperation. We aim to try to understand
how the framing of identical strategic interactions can influence the effectiveness of sanctions.

     We contribute to the existing literature by investigating the effect of framing in the context
of a VCM with punishment. Previous studies have shown the effectiveness of punishment me-
chanisms in the context of common pools (Ostrom et al., 1994) as well as public goods (e.g. Fehr
& Gächter, 2000 ; Sefton et al., 2007). Fehr and Gächter (2000) ’s interpretation of punishment
efficiency is that it enables subjects to coordinate on a common group standard. One of their
main results is that :" full cooperation emerges as the dominant behavioral standard for individual
contributions whereas in the absence of punishment opportunities full free riding is the focal ac-
tion". Nevertheless, existing conclusions on how framing can influence the creation of a common
standard of contribution, and more importantly, the effectiveness of sanctions in achieving it, are
unclear. Gächter et al. (2017) and Ramalingam et al. (2019) ran public good experiments with
punishment using the "Give and Take" frame. They showed that in both frames, the introduction
of sanctions generates a high level of cooperation that is maintained until the last period. Gächter
et al. (2017) also found that punishment is more extensive in the take frame since cooperation
is lower in this frame compared to the give frame. Cubitt et al. (2011a) found that punishment
is not sensitive to the give versus take framing manipulation after controlling for differences in
contribution levels between frames. Their analysis indicates that the main determinant of pu-
nishment behavior is the difference between the contributions of the punisher and the punished.
In contrast, Ramalingan et al. (2019), found that low contributors receive punishment more often
in the take frame than in the give frame. In this chapter, we try to answer the question : "Does
the fact of presenting the effects on others’ actions as having positive vs negative consequences
impact the effectiveness of monetary sanction ?". In other words, does framing affect the level of
provision of the public good, and the convergence toward a common contribution norm ?

    We reproduce Andreoni (1995) ’s framing by adding the possibility of expressing disapproval
by sending monetary sanctions which are costly to send and generate a payoff loss for the reci-
pient. Besides, we control for the order effect, with a treatment in which the monetary sanctions
are applied from the first period of the game and are then removed (Removal condition) ; and
a treatment in which they are only introduced in the second sequence (Introduction condition).
Our findings are consistent with those of Andreoni (1995), contributions are higher in the po-
sitive framing than in the negative framing. The availability of monetary sanctions increases
contributions under boh frames. Nevertheless, monetary sanctions are more effective when they
are introduced after subjects have experienced a baseline sequence in which they were not able
   1. Recently, Cartwright and Ramalingam (2019), tried to disentangle the effect of presenting action as having
positive or negative consequences on others’ payoffs. However, they use a "Give and Take Frame" and show
that within each kind of frame (the give and the take one), presenting actions as having positive versus negative
externalities has no effect. Nevertheless, in this experiment, there were no punishment opportunities.



                                                      163


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




to express their disapproval. Furthermore, the effectiveness of monetary punishment is strongly
influenced by the frame, as it is significantly higher in the positive framing. It is particularly true
in the Introduction condition where, in the positive framing, monetary sanctions lead the vast
majority of groups to contribute fully until the last period of the game. In comparison, in the
negative framing, the increase is limited to half of the subjects’ allocations on average. In the
positive framing, from the first period after the introduction of sanctions, a high percentage of
subjects become full contributors, and this percentage continues to increase over time. There is
no such convergence towards full contribution in the negative framing where, on the contrary,
contributions are more dispersed. Paradoxically, the number of sanctions sent is slightly higher
in this frame. As the factors explaining the sending of sanctions are similar in both frames, they
are mainly related to a lower contribution than that of peers. We argue that the frame has an
impact on the ease with which groups converge towards a standard of contribution. These results
support our hypothesis that the perception created by framing strongly influences the group’s
ability to overcome a collective action problem.

    The rest of the chapter proceeds as follow. Section 2 describes the experimental design. In
section 3, we discuss our theoretical predictions. Section 4 presents the results. Section 5 discusses
the main findings.



4.2      Experimental Design

   The experiment is based on a repeated voluntary contribution game with or without a peer
punishment option. Subjects were assigned to partner groups of n = 4 players. The test treat-
ments rely on a 2 × 2 factorial design : 2 framings (positive versus negative) × 2 conditions (with
or without sanctions).

    Table 4.1 summarizes our experimental design. Each treatment is broken into two succes-
sive sequences of 10 periods each. The Baseline corresponds to the standard contribution game
without punishment, either with positive framing (T1) or negative framing (T4). In all other
treatments, a punishment stage is either introduced in sequence 1 or sequence 2. It is impor-
tant to control for the ordering of the sequences. For instance, in the case where sanctions are
introduced in sequence 2, we observe the joint effect of experience and sanctions on the level of
group contributions. We, therefore, match each treatment for which sanctions are introduced in
sequence 1 (T2 and T5, called Removal condition) with a treatment where sanctions are removed
in sequence 2 (T3 and T6, called Introduction condition).

Table 4.1 – Numbers of subjects per treatment in Monetary sanction experiment [number of
groups]

    Treatment     Framing     Part 1            Part 2                       Number of subjects
                              period(1 − 10)    period(11 − 20)                  [groups]
    T1                        Baseline          Baseline                           28[7]
    T2            Positive    Baseline          Sanctions (Introduction)           32[8]
    T3                        Sanctions         Baseline (Removal)                 28[7]
    T4                        Baseline          Baseline                           32[8]
    T5            Negative    Baseline          Sanctions (Introduction)           36[9]
    T6                        Sanctions         Baseline (Removal)                 32[8]



                                                 164


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




    The baseline condition replicates Andreoni (1995) ’s experimental design. In both frames,
subjects had to decide how to allocate their endowment between an Individual Exchange (xi )
and a Group Exchange (yi ). The sum of their investments in the two accounts had to be strictly
equal to their endowment of 20 tokens in each period. In the positive framing, group members’
contributions to the group account are presented as having a positive influence on one’s own
payoff. The exact statement of the instructions was : "Every token you invest in the Individual
Exchange will yield a return of one. [...] Every token invested in the Group Exchange will yield
a return of β = 0.4 for each member of the group, not just the person who invested it." This
statement makes it explicit that each member of the group has a positive influence on others
through his contribution to the group account. After stage 1, player i’s earning under positive
framing can therefore be written :

                                   Π1i (yi , y−i ) = xi + β(yi + y−i )                           (4.1)

In contrast, under negative framing, the instructions stated : "Every token you invest in the
Individual Exchange will yield a return of one. However, each token invested in the Individual
Exchange will reduce the earnings of other players by β = 0.4. It will also be true that when
the other members of your group invest in the Individual Exchange, then your earnings will be
reduced by 0.4 times their investment in the Individual Exchange.[...] Every token invested in
the Group Exchange will yields a return of β = 0.4." This statement was intended to induce a
negative perception of others’ investments in their private account. Each token invested in his
private account by a group member has a negative impact onto others’ payoffs. The negative
externality of others’ investments in their private account correspond to (−βx−i ). For payoffs to
be strictly identical, for the same action in both frames, in the negative frame players received
an automatic earning in each period, equal to β(n − 1)e. Given the parameters, this amount is
24 ECU (0.4 × 3 × 20). From equation (4.2) it is easy to see that payoffs are the same under
both frames, since y−i = (n − 1)e − x−i . Gives the formal expression of player i’s payoff under
negative framing :
                             Π1i (xi , x−i ) = xi − βx−i + βyi + β(n − 1)e                  (4.2)
Both frames are strategically equivalent : the players’ strategy sets and payoff functions are
strictly identical.

    In treatments with sanctions, each period is divided into two stages : a contribution stage
followed by a sanctioning stage. After observing others’ contributions, each participant has to
decide about the number of punishment points he wants to assign to each other group member.
Each punishment point received by a member of the group reduces his stage 1 payoff by 3 ecu
and costs 1 ecu to the punisher. Subjects can send between 0 and 5 punishment points to each
other member of their group. Let pij be the number of punishment points assigned by player i
to player j (j ∈ [1, 4] ; and j 6= i). After the sanctioning stage, player i’s final payoff at the end
of the period equals :

                  Πfi (yi , y−i ) = xi + β(yi + y−i ) −
                                                        X         X
                                                          pij − 3    pji                          (4.3)
                 Πfi (xi , x−i ) = xi − βx−i + βyi + βe(n − 1) −
                                                                  X           X
                                                                      pij − 3     pji             (4.4)

Note that individuals’ contributions are observed by all members of the group at the end of step
1. However, in order to avoid reputational effects, subjects cannot identify their peers. This was
ensured by displaying individual contributions in random order at each new period.

   Each participant’s "Social value orientation (SVO)" was elicited based on Murphy et al.
(2011) ’s method at the beginning of each session. Subjects had to make 15 allocation decisions
between themselves and an anonymous receiver. For each decision, 9 options were proposed. One

                                                  165


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




of the fifteen allocation decisions was randomly selected to be paid at the end of each session.
In order not to influence subjects’ willingness to cooperate in the VCM, they were informed of
their SVO’s results only at the end of the experiment.

    The experiment was conducted in the Laboratory of Experimental Economics of Montpellier
(LEEM) between May and December 2018. In total 188 subjects participated in this experiment
(see table 4.1 for details). Upon arrival at the laboratory, each participant chose a cubicle in
which he was seated in front of a computer terminal. Subjects were informed that the experiment
consisted of 3 parts . They were informed that each of the three parts would be paid at the end
of the session. Subjects received specific instructions at the beginning of each part. They were
invited to first read the instructions privately, after which they were read one more time loudly
by the person in charge of the experiment. Before starting the experiment, each participant
had to answer eight control questions. After each question, the correct answer and a detailed
explanation were displayed. This part aimed to help participants understanding the game and
how contributions translated into earnings and vice versa. The answers to the comprehension
questionnaire were used by the experimenter to compute an understanding score.

    An experimental session lasted approximately one hour and a half. The average payment was
16.01 euros in addition to a show-up fee of 2 or 6 euros depending on the distance of the subject’s
location to the LEEM. The experiments were conducted using zTree (Fischbacher, 2007). The
SVO software was adapted from Crosetto et al. (2012).



4.3    Behavioral predictions for material sanctions

    Under the assumption of purely selfish rational agents, players should never sanction and
always contribute zero to the group account in each period. However, there is evidence that
the way the collective issue is presented and perceived can favor the emergence of a common
contribution norm (Fehr & Fischbacher, 2004). Making subjects perceive that their choices will
generate gains vs losses could induce different behaviors (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). The way
a situation is presented also impacts the moral judgment subjects have about it, changing what
is defined as an acceptable or reprehensible behavior (Kahneman, 1992). Cubitt et al. (2011b)’s
experiment showed that in a public good game using the Give and Take frame, acting as a free
rider is more strongly condemned in the give frame than in the take frame. This observation
provides the basis for Prediction 1.

   Prediction 1 : Contributions to the public good are larger in the positive frame
than in the negative frame.

    Regarding punishment, the null hypothesis is that subjects should not send monetary sanc-
tions because it is costly to do so. However, it has been shown that punitive behavior is induced
by non-selfish interest and normative behavior. Experimental evidence has shown that people
punish for non-selfish reasons, also called altruistic punishment (Fehr & Gächter, 2002 ; Carpen-
ter, 2007). Moreover, as Fehr and Schmidt (1999) demonstrate that, if subjects are inequality
averse, they might bear the cost of punishment. Consequently, if the proportion of subjects who
are averse to inequality is sufficient, cooperation will appear 2 . For Carpenter et al. (2006) and
Carpenter et al. (2009), the output of a team depends strongly "on the willingness of some
team members to contribute altruistically to a common project and to bear the costs in order to
  2. confere Proposition 4 c page 839 and proposition 5 p 841


                                                    166


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




discipline other members who do not contribute". It brings us to Prediction 2.

    Prediciton 2 : The availability of peer punishment increases contributions.

    Perceiving others’ actions as having negative externalities can decrease the willingness to
contribute and to bear costs. Moreover, we also state the hypothesis that the group dynamic
not only depends on the willingness of cooperators to punish shirkers but also on the willingness
of shirkers to respond to punishment by increasing their level of cooperation. That is why we
consider that the perception of others’ actions also impacts the responsiveness to sanctions. In
linear public good games, under the Give frame, the type of feedback affects subjects’ reaction
to received punishment (Ramalingam et al., 2018 ; Nikiforakis, 2010). Ramalingam et al. (2018)
show that lower information in the instructions, leads to a lower understanding of the game, but
also a higher level of sanctions send and lower responsiveness to sanctions. Nikiforakis (2010) ’s
experiment shows that the feedback format of others’ actions, revealing their contributions, their
earnings or both, affects the group members’ ability to converge toward a common contribution
standard 3 . In the treatment in which subjects had the two kinds of information, the severity of
punishment is slightly higher for low contributors, whereas they are less likely to increase their
contributions when they get punished. We state the hypothesis that under negative framing, the
higher contributor will be less willing to bear the cost of punishment and that low contribu-
tors are less likely to reciprocate positively by increasing their contributions. It will impact the
effectiveness of peers’ punishment. In other words, if subjects perceive the actions of others as
generating negative externalities, it is more difficult for groups to converge towards a common
standard of contribution.

   Prediction 3 : In the negative frame, sanctions result in a smaller increase in
contributions.



4.4      Experimental Results

    In this section, we report on how framing affects contributions to the group’s account and
how it interacts with the implementation of monetary sanctions. Next, we analyze how framing
affects punishment behavior and the response to it. We also analyze how other effects of framing
on perception and stated reciprocity, may explain the observed differences. We conclude by
analyzing the effect of framing on the effectiveness of sanctions.


4.4.1     Voluntary contributions under different framing with and without pu-
          nishment

    Result 1 : Contributions to the public good are larger under positive framing.

   Result 1 is illustrated in figures 4.2 and 4.3 where contributions remain slightly higher in the
positive frame in the Baseline, even though the decline of the average contribution is similar in
both frames. Mann Withney tests confirm that in the first sequence of the Baseline treatment
   3. Confere results in part 3.3 Convergence of contributions p 696 : "If feedback format affects the ability of
participants to establish common contribution standards, providing feedback in two different formats that highlight
the conflict between private and collective interest should retard the convergence of contributions ".



                                                       167


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




but also of the Introduction condition, the average group contribution is higher in the positive
frame than in the negative frame (p = 0.004 and p = 0.020, respectively). Moreover, the result 1
is supported by the panel tobit estimation presented in table 4.2. The dummy variable Framing
has a positive and significant effect on contributions. We, therefore, conclude that cooperation
is larger in the positive frame.

   Result 2 : The availabililty of sanctions increases contributions in both frames. Negative
framing leads to a lower increase in contributions in the Introduction condition.

    The possibility of inflict material sanctions increases individual contributions, independently
of the sequence in which they are introduced. This result is supported by the significance and
positive sign of the variable sanction presented in table 4.2, and illustrated in figures 4.2 and 4.3
representing the average group contribution by treatment. As a robustness check, the double-
difference analysis (DiD) also supports the positive effect of sanctions on the contribution increase
(cf. appendix 4.F.1, 4.F.2, 4.F.3 and 4.F.4).

    Nevertheless, in the Introduction condition, sanctions are more effective under the positive
frame. The interaction variable Sanction×Framing has a strong positive and significant impact
on contributions, meaning that the introduction of sanctions leads to higher contributions in the
positive frame than in the negative frame (cf tables 4.2 and 4.3). In sequence 2, the contribution
path in the positive frame contrasts sharply with the contribution path in the negative frame
(as illustrated in figure 4.2). The introduction of monetary sanctions leads groups’ contributions
to come close to the socially optimum level of contribution. In comparison, in the negative
frame, the introduction of monetary sanctions allows group contributions to be maintained at a
level which is half of the socially optimum level and the Nash equilibrium level. This difference of
contribution is also significant, according to the Mann Whitney test in the Introduction condition
(p = 0.002).

  Looking at individual determinants of cooperation, our results show that subjects with higher
SVO scores are also those who contribute the most to the public good.




                                                168


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.2 – Individual contributions to the group account in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit
estimation two sided, random effects).

                                       (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)              (5)
                                     All data   All data   All data    Without sanction    Sanctions
               Framing                6.074∗ ∗ ∗ 4.608∗ ∗ ∗ 3.633∗ ∗ ∗      4.917∗ ∗ ∗       7.418∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (1.159)    (1.187)    (1.206)         (1.380)          (1.696)

               Material sanctions     11.23∗ ∗ ∗ 9.272∗ ∗ ∗ 9.320∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.433)    (0.571)    (0.570)

               Period                 -0.313∗ ∗ ∗ -0.309∗ ∗ ∗ -0.310∗ ∗ ∗    -0.643∗ ∗ ∗     0.194∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0307)    (0.0305)    (0.0305)       (0.0458)       (0.0749)

               Material × Framing                 4.258∗ ∗ ∗ 4.301∗ ∗ ∗
                                                 (0.842)    (0.841)

               SVO_score                                       13.34∗ ∗ ∗    15.51∗ ∗ ∗      4.697
                                                              (2.922)       (3.450)         (4.276)

               Gender                                          0.949         1.022           -0.122
                                                              (1.092)       (1.284)         (1.616)

               Age                                            -0.0437       0.0787          0.0322
                                                              (0.153)       (0.181)         (0.208)

               Understanding                                   0.681∗        -0.150          2.035∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (0.378)       (0.446)         (0.543)

               _cons                  4.313∗ ∗ ∗ 5.002∗ ∗ ∗ -4.341           -0.766          -4.386
                                     (0.863)    (0.868)     (4.469)         (5.332)         (6.084)
               sigma_u
               _cons                  7.533∗ ∗ ∗ 7.487∗ ∗ ∗ 6.991∗ ∗ ∗       8.102∗ ∗ ∗      8.349∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.451)    (0.449)    (0.424)          (0.536)         (0.649)
               sigma_e
               _cons                  9.651∗ ∗ ∗ 9.603∗ ∗ ∗ 9.603∗ ∗ ∗       9.278∗ ∗ ∗      7.636∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.179)    (0.178)    (0.178)          (0.216)         (0.236)
               N                      3760       3760       3760             2480            1280
               Standard errors in parentheses
               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        169


                 Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.3 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
tions in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                             (1)                               (2)                 (3)                         (4)                          (5)                  (6)
                        Removal + Bsl                     Removal + Bsl       Removal + Bsl            Introduction + Bsl           Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                    3.686∗∗                           4.174∗ ∗ ∗          4.073∗∗                     6.762∗ ∗ ∗                   4.295∗ ∗ ∗           2.526∗
                           (1.559)                           (1.595)             (1.604)                     (1.306)                      (1.300)              (1.339)

 Material sanctions         7.276∗ ∗ ∗                        8.131∗ ∗ ∗             8.233∗ ∗ ∗              14.37∗ ∗ ∗                   10.02∗ ∗ ∗           10.20∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.756)                           (0.944)                (0.942)                 (0.722)                      (0.849)              (0.844)

 Period                    -0.508∗ ∗ ∗                        -0.509∗ ∗ ∗           -0.504∗ ∗ ∗              -0.478∗ ∗ ∗                  -0.470∗ ∗ ∗          -0.477∗ ∗ ∗
                          (0.0474)                           (0.0474)              (0.0474)                 (0.0462)                     (0.0453)             (0.0452)

 Material × Framing                                           -1.851                 -1.763                                               9.561∗ ∗ ∗           9.515∗ ∗ ∗
                                                             (1.211)                (1.210)                                              (1.106)              (1.100)

 SVO_score                                                                           13.47∗ ∗ ∗                                                                17.28∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                    (3.927)                                                                   (3.238)

 Gender                                                                              0.346                                                                     2.008∗
                                                                                    (1.502)                                                                   (1.163)

 Age                                                                                -0.0982                                                                   -0.0328
                                                                                    (0.206)                                                                   (0.178)

 Understanding                                                                       0.205                                                                     0.705
                                                                                    (0.505)                                                                   (0.439)

 _cons                      7.800∗ ∗ ∗                        7.570∗ ∗ ∗             1.835                   5.320∗ ∗ ∗                   6.496∗ ∗ ∗           -5.516
                           (1.231)                           (1.242)                (6.127)                 (0.974)                      (0.957)              (5.242)
 sigma_u
 _cons                      8.162∗ ∗ ∗                        8.178∗ ∗ ∗             7.741∗ ∗ ∗              6.969∗ ∗ ∗                   6.779∗ ∗ ∗           5.986∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.608)                           (0.609)                (0.581)                 (0.515)                      (0.503)              (0.455)
 sigma_e
 _cons                      9.424∗ ∗ ∗                        9.420∗ ∗ ∗             9.422∗ ∗ ∗              9.391∗ ∗ ∗                   9.221∗ ∗ ∗           9.220∗ ∗ ∗
                           (0.222)                           (0.221)                (0.221)                 (0.207)                      (0.203)              (0.203)
 N                          2400                              2400                   2400                    2560                         2560                 2560
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01
                                       80
                                       70
                            20 30 40 50 60
                            Tokens in group account
                                       10
                                       0




                                                      0                5                       10                     15                     20
                                                                                              Period
                                                                       Positive framing Baseline             Negative framing Baseline




                      Figure 4.1 – Evolution of the average group contribution in the Baseline.




                                                                                          170


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                 80
                      20 30 40 50 60 70
                      Tokens in group account
                                 10
                                 0




                                                0       5                         10                    15                      20
                                                                                 Period
                                                    Positive framing Baseline             Positive framing Monetary Sanction

                                                    Negative framing Baseline             Negative framing Monetary Sanction




Figure 4.2 – Evolution of the average group contribution in the Introduction condition in Monetary sanction
experiment.
                                 80
                      20 30 40 50 60 70
                      Tokens in group account
                                 10
                                 0




                                                0       5                         10                    15                      20
                                                                                 Period
                                                    Positive framing Monetary Sanction              Positive framing Baseline

                                                    Negative framing Monetary Sanction              Negative framing Baseline




Figure 4.3 – Evolution of the average group contribution in the Removal condition in Monetary sanction
experiment.




    In order to understand what drives this effect, we explore how sanctioning behavior and the
response to it are affected by framing. This analysis will allow us to make conjectures on why the
effectiveness of different sanctions is also affected by the sequence in which they are implemented
(Removal vs Introduction condition).




                                                                                171


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.4.2    Sanctioning behavior

    In this subsection, we address the question of whether sanctioning behavior differs across
frames ? Are punishers more likely to sanction deviations from peer average under positive fra-
ming than under negative framing ? Furthermore, is a given deviation from peer average more
severely sanctioned under positive than under negative framing ?

   We analyze sanctions from two points of view : first, from the point of view of the punishers
and second, from the point of view of the sanctioned group members. The first analysis is based
on subjects’ punishment vectors, i.e. the three punishment decisions taken by subject i towards
subject j 6= i. For the second analysis, we consider the level of sanctions received
                                                                                  P by a subject,
which is the sum of sanctions sent to him by each other member of the group ( pji ).


Is the propensity to send monetary sanctions frame-dependent ?


    Result 2.1 : The likelihood to inflict sanctions is higher in the negative frame due to a
lower contribution level. Nevertheless, the punishment drivers and the severity are similar in
both frames.

   Result 2.1 is supported by the probit regressions presented in table 4.4, where the variable
Framing has a negative and significant impact on the propensity to send sanctions.

    However, the drivers of sanctioning and its dynamic are similar in both frames. The
individual contribution level yi , is not itself a determinant of the decision to punish. Indeed, this
decision is in both frames driven by social comparisons.

    The major driver of sent punishment points is the contribution deviation from peer’s average.
Subject i sanctions the more heavily subject j the larger the absolute negative deviation |yj − yi |,
with yj −yi < 0. Besides, the comparison with other group members (excluding i and j) also plays
a role in the decision to inflict punishment points. The lower a player’s contribution compared
to the average of the two other players (ȳ−i−j ), the higher is his likelihood of being punished
by i. The lower a subject’s contribution, the more likely it is that the other contributors, who
consequently have a higher contribution, will bear the cost of the punishment. These results
lend credence to the conjecture that some high contributors bear the costs of punishing shirkers.
Nevertheless, there is also antisocial punishment and sanctions are also send to subjects who had
a higher level of contribution yj − yi > 0.




                                                 172


                Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.4 – Subject’s i propensity to send monetary sanction to subject j (probit analysis with cluster by
subject).

                                                          (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                       All data   All data      Removal      Removal       Introduction    Introduction
  Framing                                               -0.136     -0.239∗       -0.354∗      -0.393∗          0.150          0.0118
                                                       (-0.95)    (-1.66)        (-1.75)      (-1.96)         (0.67)          (0.05)

  (absolute) Negative Deviation yj − yi < 0            0.0944∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0667∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0913∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0569∗ ∗ ∗        0.110∗ ∗ ∗     0.0867∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (7.38)      (4.50)      (5.62)      (2.83)             (5.73)         (3.89)

  Positive Deviation yj − yi > 0                       -0.00326     0.0333∗∗      0.00415     0.0441∗        -0.0133         0.0147
                                                        (-0.28)     (2.01)         (0.27)     (1.81)         (-0.77)         (0.62)

  Own contribution                                     -0.0160∗   0.00817         -0.0178∗    0.0115         -0.0274∗∗       -0.00688
                                                       (-1.95)     (0.78)         (-1.93)     (0.80)         (-2.07)          (-0.44)

  Period                                               -0.0672∗ ∗ ∗-0.0609∗ ∗ ∗-0.0816∗ ∗ ∗-0.0722∗ ∗ ∗      -0.0520∗∗       -0.0477∗∗
                                                       (-4.63)     (-4.00)     (-3.96)     (-3.34)           (-2.54)         (-2.23)

  Sequence                                              0.811∗ ∗ ∗ 0.776∗ ∗ ∗
                                                        (4.28)     (3.89)

  Positive deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j > 0              -0.0310∗∗                  -0.0308                         -0.0220
                                                                  (-2.02)                    (-1.22)                         (-1.26)

  Negative deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j < 0                0.0557∗ ∗ ∗               0.0641∗ ∗ ∗                    0.0451∗∗
                                                                    (4.48)                    (3.70)                         (2.51)

  _cons                                                -0.714∗ ∗ ∗ -1.109∗ ∗ ∗ -0.539∗∗      -1.050∗ ∗ ∗     -0.138          -0.460
                                                       (-4.21)     (-5.43)     (-2.50)       (-3.74)         (-0.40)         (-1.17)
  N                                                     3840        3840        1800          1800            2040            2040
  t statistics in parentheses
                                               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




Monetary sanctions received


    As illustrated by figure 4.4, the number of monetary sanctions received are slightly higher
in the negative frame. However, as illustrated in figure 4.5, the likelihood of being punished,
depends on the deviation from peer average yi − ȳ−i . There are no strong differences between
the two frames, except for high contributors (between 14 and 20) who are not punished in the
positive frame, whereas they are in the negative one.

    The severity of received punishment is also linked to the level of negative deviation from
the peer average. As illustrated in figure 4.6, the shirkers, who have a strong negative deviation
from the peer average, are more severely punished. However, there is no framing effect on the
severity of punishment, and the number of sanctions sent decreases in both frames over time.
These results are supported by the tobit analysis of the number of sanctions received presented
in table 4.5.

    These results lead us to argue that punishment drivers are the same in both settings. Howe-
ver, due to a higher contribution dispersion, illustrated by the considerably smaller number of
observations in the interval [−2; 2] in the negative frame, the penalties sent are higher. Having
a higher spread of contribution in each group, and a higher number of sanctions sent seem to
signal that subjects have more difficulties to coordinate in the negative frame under sanctions.




                                                              173


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                             2.5
                           Number of sanction received
                              1        1.5   .5     2




                                                                    0                 2                   4                6                      8              10
                                                                                                               Period
                                                                                                 Positive Framing                Negative Framing




                  Figure 4.4 – Evolution of the number of monetary sanctions received.



                                                                        13   8
                           10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100




                                                                                 52
                           Percentage punished by deviation level




                                                                                          32
                                                                                                     83
                                                                                               159


                                                                                                                                             49            19
                                                                                                                                  73
                                                                                                                                                      32
                                                                                                               255         133
                                                                                                                     361



                                                                                                                                                                11
                                             0




                                                                    [-20,-14)    [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]                     (14,20]
                                                                                       Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                           Negative Framing                       Positive Framing




Figure 4.5 – Likelihood of receiving monetary sanctions by deviation level (with the number of observations).




                                                                                                              174


                    Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                               Average punishment points received
                                                                            8
                                                                       13




                                                                                  52

                                                                                       32
                                                                                             159 83
                                                                                                                            73    49 32
                                                                                                          255                                19
                                                                                                                361   133
                                                                                                                                                  11

                                                                    [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]      (14,20]
                                                                                      Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                       Negative Framing                 Positive Framing



Figure 4.6 – Average number of monetary sanctions received by deviation level (with the number of observa-
tion).




   Table 4.5 – Number of monetary sanctions received (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                                                                                   (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)
                                                                                All data     All data       Removal          Removal      Introduction     Introduction
         Framing                                                                 -0.147       -1.486∗        -1.359∗          -1.640          1.100            -0.256
                                                                                (0.514)      (0.882)        (0.772)          (1.141)         (0.720)          (1.707)

         Positive Deviation yi − ȳ−i > 0                                        0.0308      0.00573         0.0585           -0.0420       0.00610           0.0351
                                                                                (0.0380)     (0.0437)       (0.0638)         (0.0794)       (0.0458)         (0.0498)

         Negative Deviation yi − ȳ−i ≤ 0                                         0.579∗ ∗ ∗ 0.575∗ ∗ ∗ 0.580∗ ∗ ∗ 0.574∗ ∗ ∗                 0.609∗ ∗ ∗       0.605∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (0.0342)    (0.0424)   (0.0524)   (0.0622)                  (0.0462)         (0.0605)

         Peers’ average contribution                                             -0.0622∗     -0.0749∗∗ -0.0841               -0.0717        -0.0870∗         -0.124∗∗
                                                                                (0.0331)     (0.0353)   (0.0531)             (0.0535)       (0.0446)         (0.0503)

         Period                                                                  -0.268∗ ∗ ∗ -0.318∗ ∗ ∗ -0.341∗ ∗ ∗ -0.317∗ ∗ ∗             -0.203∗ ∗ ∗      -0.264∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (0.0388)    (0.0477)    (0.0649)    (0.0848)                (0.0487)         (0.0640)

         Sequence                                                                3.074∗ ∗ ∗ 3.052∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (0.618)    (0.615)

         Period × Framing                                                                      0.119∗                        -0.0729                          0.122
                                                                                             (0.0633)                        (0.128)                         (0.101)

         Positive Deviation × Framing                                                         0.0753                          0.281∗∗                         -0.187
                                                                                             (0.0789)                        (0.121)                         (0.115)

         Negative Deviation × Framing                                                         0.0185                         0.000385                         0.0356
                                                                                             (0.0688)                         (0.108)                        (0.0921)

         _cons                                                                   -0.626        0.102         0.195            0.185          1.417            2.595∗∗
                                                                                (0.617)       (0.730)       (0.980)          (1.069)        (0.933)          (1.194)
         sigma_u
         _cons                                                                   2.387∗ ∗ ∗ 2.367∗ ∗ ∗ 2.540∗ ∗ ∗ 2.562∗ ∗ ∗                 2.201∗ ∗ ∗       2.238∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (0.219)    (0.217)     (0.354)    (0.362)                   (0.265)          (0.270)
         sigma_e
         _cons                                                                   2.888∗ ∗ ∗ 2.881∗ ∗ ∗ 3.237∗ ∗ ∗ 3.190∗ ∗ ∗                 2.587∗ ∗ ∗       2.574∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                (0.111)    (0.111)     (0.192)    (0.190)                   (0.130)          (0.130)
         N                                                                       1280       1280         600        600                       680              680
         Standard errors in parentheses
                                                                                 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01



                                                                                                      175


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.4.3   Responsiveness to monetary sanctions

    We now analyze how framing affects the response to received sanctions. When sanctions
are introduced in the second sequence, the reaction to sanctions differs sharply according to
the frame. This difference is observable from the first period, i.e. before subjects received their
eventual first sanctions. In positive framing, the majority of the subjects invest more than half
of their endowment in the public good in the first period. Only 25 percent of the subjects do the
same in the negative frame (figure 4.9). The threat of sanctions generates a higher increase of
contributions in the positive frame than in the negative one. Moreover, the trend of contributions
also differs according to the frame. Under positive framing, average contributions increase, while
they remain at a stable level in the negative framing as illustrated in figure 4.2. In order to
understand why we analyze how frames affect contribution changes and the common contribution
standard.


Do monetary sanctions received affect the changes in contributions ?


   Result 2.2 : Low Types increase more their contributions under positive framing than under
negative framing.

    We distinguish subjects’ reactions to sanctions depending of their type. Let us define subject
i in period t − 1 as a High Type if yit−1 − y t−1                          t−1
                                              −i > 0 and as a Low Type if yi   − y t−1
                                                                                   −i < 0. Framing
has a positive and significant effect on the contribution change of Low types. Low types increase
significantly more their contributions in the positive frame.

    This result is supported by the panel regressions presented in table 4.6 and illustrated by
figures 4.7 and 4.8. In these regressions, we analyze individuals’ contribution changes between
periods t and t − 1, depending on the monetary sanctions received in t − 1, the contribution
deviation in t−1 with respect to peers’ average contribution (yit−1 −y t−1
                                                                       −i ) and framing. Moreover,
as the capacity to increase one’s contribution depends on one’s current contribution level - the
higher the contribution the lower the possibility of increase - we take into account the variable
peers’ average in t − 1.

    As expected, the other driver of the contribution’s change is the level of received sanctions
in period t − 1.




                                               176


                Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.6 – Panel regression of individuals contribution change (t) by contributor type in Monetary sanction
experiment (random effects with clusters by group).

                                                   High_Contributors (xt−1
                                                                       i   − xt−1
                                                                               −i > 0)       Low_Contributors (xt−1
                                                                                                                 i  − xt−1
                                                                                                                        −i ≤ 0)
                                                   All data Removal      Introduction        All data   Removal    Introduction
  Framing                                           1.479∗    1.754          0.813            1.323∗ ∗ ∗ 1.267∗∗       2.184∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.798)   (1.368)        (1.221)          (0.457)     (0.633)      (0.752)

  Monetary sanctions received in period t − 1      -0.0123      0.223          -0.297∗∗       0.579∗ ∗ ∗ 0.565∗ ∗ ∗    0.666∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.204)     (0.407)        (0.145)        (0.158)     (0.210)      (0.236)

  Peers’ average in t − 1                           -0.178∗ ∗ ∗ -0.246∗∗       -0.107         -0.161∗ ∗ ∗ -0.149∗∗     -0.242∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.0680)     (0.111)       (0.0894)       (0.0379)    (0.0632)     (0.0551)

  Deviation from peer average in t − 1              -0.723∗ ∗ ∗ -0.938∗ ∗ ∗    -0.567∗ ∗ ∗    -0.257∗∗    -0.320∗∗     -0.169
                                                   (0.0955)     (0.148)       (0.0937)       (0.104)     (0.128)      (0.173)

  Period                                            -0.266∗∗    -0.284         -0.230         -0.0193     -0.109       0.101
                                                   (0.133)     (0.195)        (0.185)        (0.0743)    (0.0964)     (0.110)

  Sequence                                          2.435                                     0.526
                                                   (1.629)                                   (0.724)

  Monetary sanctions in period t − 1 × Framing     0.00856      -0.187         0.348          -0.216      -0.573∗     -0.0562
                                                   (0.224)     (0.402)        (0.328)        (0.204)     (0.314)      (0.265)

  SVO_score                                         1.961       0.658          3.554          2.154∗∗     3.547∗∗      0.435
                                                   (2.144)     (3.078)        (2.739)        (0.963)     (1.423)      (1.578)

  Age                                               0.221∗      0.314          0.103          -0.101∗∗    -0.120∗      -0.0946
                                                   (0.125)     (0.256)        (0.101)        (0.0430)    (0.0691)     (0.0608)

  Gender                                           0.0161      -0.0414         0.579          0.282       0.425       -0.0993
                                                   (0.593)     (0.915)        (1.006)        (0.430)     (0.871)      (0.431)

  Understanding                                     0.347∗      0.252          0.538         0.0330      0.0596       -0.0498
                                                   (0.187)     (0.265)        (0.352)        (0.124)     (0.206)      (0.141)

  _cons                                             -4.112      -3.341         -2.795         2.461       2.403        3.078
                                                   (3.479)     (7.036)        (6.094)        (1.542)     (2.526)      (2.698)
  N                                                   451         224            227           701         316          385
  R2                                                 0.219       0.226          0.256         0.212       0.220        0.226
  Standard errors in parentheses
                                                * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                               177


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.7 – Panel regression of individuals contributions change, global (t) in Monetary sanction experiment
(random effects with clusters by group).

                                                                                                            (1)         (2)           (3)
                                                                                                          All data   Removal     Introduction
            Framing                                                                                        1.251∗ ∗ ∗ 1.207∗ ∗ ∗     1.292∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.334)     (0.388)       (0.645)

            Monetary sanctions received in t − 1                                                              0.426∗ ∗ ∗ 0.474∗∗             0.399∗∗
                                                                                                             (0.152)     (0.235)            (0.199)

            Peers’average in t − 1                                                                         -0.112∗ ∗ ∗ -0.130∗∗              -0.111∗∗
                                                                                                          (0.0293)    (0.0515)              (0.0484)

            Positive Deviation in t − 1                                                                    -0.570∗ ∗ ∗ -0.601∗ ∗ ∗           -0.544∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                          (0.0959)     (0.172)              (0.107)

            Negative Deviation in t − 1                                                                     0.289∗ ∗ ∗ 0.301∗∗               0.255∗
                                                                                                          (0.0882)     (0.118)              (0.133)

            Period                                                                                         -0.119∗            -0.169         -0.0719
                                                                                                          (0.0679)           (0.104)        (0.0864)

            Sequence                                                                                          1.421∗
                                                                                                             (0.749)

            Monetary sanctions received in period t − 1 × Framing                                             -0.215          -0.453∗       0.0124
                                                                                                             (0.185)         (0.260)        (0.264)

            _cons                                                                                             1.703∗          2.342          2.286
                                                                                                             (0.882)         (1.554)        (1.729)
            N                                                                                                 1152             540            612
            R2                                                                                                0.279           0.269          0.297
            Standard errors in parentheses
            * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




    Figures 4.7 and 4.8 present the contribution change in period t depending on the deviation
level in the previous period, distinguishing treatments where sanctions are introduced in the first
or the second sequence.
                                       20




                                                                1
                                                   10 15
                          Average change in contribution




                                                            5

                                                                       23
                                             5




                                                                            21     65 53
                                                                                                  115
                                                                                             97              34
                                       0




                                                                                                        75
                                                                                                                       19               8
                                                                                                                            20
                       -15 -10 -5




                                                                                                                                  4
                                       -20




                                                           [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)   [-8,-2)    [-2,2]      (2,8]         (8,14]    (14,20]
                                                                                       Precedent deviation

                                                                              Negative Framing                Positive Framing



Figure 4.7 – Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period in
Monetary sanction experiment (Removal condition).




                                                                                           178


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                      20          10 15
                         Average change in contribution
                                                                           9


                                                               5                         24
                                                           6




                                            5
                                                                      28            75
                                                                                               130 208
                                                                                                                         12

                                      0
                                                                                                         46 29
                      -15 -10 -5
                                                                                                                    27               1
                                                                                                                                12
                                      -20




                                                          [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]      (2,8]     (8,14]      (14,20]
                                                                                        Precedent deviation

                                                                               Negative Framing              Positive Framing



Figure 4.8 – Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period in
Monetary sanction experiment (Introduction condition).




                                                                                              179


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




Emergence of a common contribution standard ?


    Result 2.3 : In the Introduction condition, positive framing leads to the convergence to the
full contribution. In the negative frame, there is no obvious convergence towards a contribution
standard.

    Do sanctions trigger the emergence of a common contribution standard, i.e. the convergence of
individual contributions toward a given level ? To answer this question, we analyze the evolution
of the frequencies of different contribution levels, and their dispersion by group and individual.

    In the positive frame in the Introduction condition, full contribution becomes the most
common behavior. From period 3, following the introduction of sanctions, a majority of sub-
jects is fully contributing. This proportion keeps on increasing until the last period of the game to
reach over 84 percent of full contributors. In comparison, there is no such dynamic in the negative
frame, where the dispersion of contributions is higher than in the positive frame throughout the
sanctioning sequence (as illustrated in figure 4.9).

    In the Removal condition, we also observe a stronger convergence to full contribution in
the positive frame. From the fifth period to the end of the first sequence, around 46 percent
of subjects invest their whole endowment in the public account. In comparison in the negative
frame, less than 30 percent do so.

    Moreover, we observe that the contribution inequality at the group level, as measured by the
Gini index, is significantly higher in the negative frame than in the positive one. This inequality
decreases when sanctions are introduced. However, the decrease is significantly stronger in the
positive frame. Those results are provided by the panel tobit analysis of the Gini index presented
in table 4.8. In comparison, individuals’ spread of contributions are larger in the negative frame,
showing that each subject has more difficulty to set a target contribution level. We argue that it
seems relatively easy and quick for subjects to identify a contribution norm in the positive frame.
In contrast, it is not the case in the negative frame, for which subjects have more difficulties to
coordinate (cf appendix 4.J.2, 4.J.3 and 4.J.4).

    Conjecture 1 : In the negative frame, subjects perceive others’ actions as a negative exter-
nality. As a consequence, they have more difficulties in identifying what should be the appropriate
behavior. They are, therefore, less likely to react to punishment by increasing their contributions.
It hampers the convergence of contributions towards a common contribution norm.

    Conjecture 2 : The effect of sanctions is more effective in the Introduction condition. Be-
cause sanctions are unavailable in sequence 1, the Introduction condition provides an appropriate
context for perceptions to reinforce over time and stabilize. In contrast, in the Removal condition,
subjects can express their disapproval, and thereby reveal their expectations about others’ actions.
This possibility may counter the negative perception generated by framing.




                                                180


                            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                      Positive Baseline (seq1)                                          Positive Sanction (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                               percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                              0 25 50 75 100
                                  1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                      Negative Baseline (seq1)                                         Negative Sanction (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                               percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                              0 25 50 75 100
                                  1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                                           free rider                                 pbl[1,5]
                                                           pbl[6,10]                                  pbl[11,15]
                                                           pbl[16,19]                                 full contributor


Figure 4.9 – Evolution of contribution categories in Monetary sanction experiment (Introduction condition).




                                      Positive Sanction (seq 1)                                         Positive Baseline (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                               percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                              0 25 50 75 100




                                  1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                      Negative Sanction (seq 1)                                         Negative Baseline (seq2)
           percent of frequency




                                                                               percent of frequency
          0 25 50 75 100




                                                                              0 25 50 75 100




                                  1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                                           free rider                                 pbl[1,5]
                                                           pbl[6,10]                                  pbl[11,15]
                                                           pbl[16,19]                                 full contributor


 Figure 4.10 – Evolution of contribution categories in Monetary sanction experiment (Removal condition).




                                                                            181


                  Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                            Positive Baseline (seq1)                                            Positive Baseline (seq2)
 percent of frequency




                                                                       percent of frequency
0 25 50 75 100




                                                                      0 25 50 75 100
                        1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                            Negative Baseline (seq1)                                            Negative Baseline (seq2)
 percent of frequency




                                                                       percent of frequency
0 25 50 75 100




                                                                      0 25 50 75 100
                        1    2     3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                             11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20


                                                   free rider                                 pbl[1,5]
                                                   pbl[6,10]                                  pbl[11,15]
                                                   pbl[16,19]                                 full contributor


                                 Figure 4.11 – Evolution of contribution categories (Baseline).




                                                                    182


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.8 – Gini analysis in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation two sided
with one observation per group per period, random effects)

                                      (1)         (2)              (3)              (4)         (5)              (6)
                                   All data    All data     Without Sanctions   Sanctions    Removal        Introduction
  Framing                           -0.137∗ ∗ ∗ -0.129∗ ∗ ∗      -0.132∗ ∗ ∗      -0.160∗∗    -0.205           -0.113∗
                                   (0.0391)    (0.0400)         (0.0394)         (0.0721)    (0.135)          (0.0637)

  Sanctions                         -0.287∗ ∗ ∗ -0.276∗ ∗ ∗                                   -0.198∗ ∗ ∗      -0.252∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0132)    (0.0178)                                      (0.0461)         (0.0411)

  Period                            0.0145∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0145∗ ∗ ∗      0.0280∗ ∗ ∗     -0.0109∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0150∗ ∗ ∗ 0.00421
                                  (0.00189) (0.00189)           (0.00199)       (0.00301)    (0.00364)    (0.00326)

  Sequence                          -0.110∗ ∗ ∗ -0.110∗ ∗ ∗      -0.199∗ ∗ ∗     0.0753
                                   (0.0217)    (0.0217)         (0.0249)        (0.0715)

  Number of women (0 : 4)          -0.00387    -0.00475         -0.00467        -0.000490    -0.0693          0.00148
                                   (0.0213)    (0.0213)         (0.0215)         (0.0405)    (0.107)          (0.0278)

  Average age of the group         0.00618     0.00624          -0.00168         0.0215       0.0359          -0.00260
                                   (0.0109)    (0.0108)         (0.0110)        (0.0180)     (0.0225)         (0.0169)

  Number of cooperators (0 : 4)     -0.0111     -0.0112         -0.00862         -0.0271      0.0200           -0.0398
                                   (0.0198)    (0.0198)         (0.0199)        (0.0378)     (0.0446)         (0.0350)

  Sanctions × Framing                           -0.0240                                        0.118∗ ∗ ∗      -0.143∗ ∗ ∗
                                               (0.0264)                                      (0.0420)         (0.0378)

  _cons                             0.335        0.331            0.412∗          -0.110      -0.373           0.594
                                   (0.244)      (0.244)          (0.247)         (0.409)     (0.466)          (0.384)
  sigma_u
  _cons                              0.121∗ ∗ ∗ 0.121∗ ∗ ∗        0.121∗ ∗ ∗     0.174∗ ∗ ∗ 0.144∗ ∗ ∗          0.107∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0138)    (0.0138)         (0.0146)        (0.0236)    (0.0285)          (0.0207)
  sigma_e
  _cons                             0.162∗ ∗ ∗ 0.162∗ ∗ ∗         0.138∗ ∗ ∗      0.145∗ ∗ ∗ 0.172∗ ∗ ∗        0.166∗ ∗ ∗
                                  (0.00410) (0.00410)           (0.00419)       (0.00693)   (0.00805)        (0.00715)
  N                                  911        911                596             315         284              332
  Standard errors in parentheses
                                         * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




4.4.4       What are the potential effects of the frame on perception and stated
            conditional contributions ?

How does framing affects the perception of others’ actions ?


    Did the frame influence subjects perception of others’ actions ? At the end of the experiment,
we ask subjects a multiple choice question about how they would qualify the effect of others’
actions on their earnings. The possible responses were : 1) Important gains, 2) Gains, 3) No gain
or loss, 4) Losses and 5) Important losses. As illustrated in figure 4.12, in the positive frame, a
higher percentage of subjects qualifies others’ actions as generators of gains or important gains.
When sanctions are available, the positive frame leads to significantly higher contributions and,
therefore, higher earnings. However, this argument is less relevant in Baseline conditions where
contributions are only slightly higher in positive framing while positive qualifications are twice
as frequent in positive framing than negative framing.




                                                          183


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                          How would you qualify the effect of others'actions on your gains
                       Negative Framing, 0               Negative Framing, 1           Negative Framing, 2

                                                                3.125%
                                                                   6.25%
                            25%        25%                                                           19.44%
                                                                                          27.78%
                                                           31.25%
                                                                             34.38%
                         9.375%                                                                            25%
                                  40.63%                            25%                     27.78%



                        Positive Framing, 0               Positive Framing, 1           Positive Framing, 2

                             7.143%                            7.143%
                                                                    14.29%                   9.375%
                                                                                                  18.75%
                                  21.43%

                         35.71%                            35.71%                        34.38%
                                                                          28.57%                       21.88%
                                      32.14%
                             3.571%                                 14.29%                        15.63%




                                                    Important Losses                  Losses
                                                    No gains or losses                Gains
                                                    Important Gains
                  Graphs by Framing and Trt_order



         Figure 4.12 – Perception of others’actions by framing in Monetary sanction experiment.




What are the potential effects of the frame on stated conditional contribution ?


    We also tried to understand if the frame impacts the reciprocity. Following Gächter et al.
(2017) we consider that reciprocity can be defined as a “form of conditional cooperation : the
willingness to cooperate provided others do the same.” We replicate Fosgaard et al. (2014)’s
question at the end of the experiment. Subjects are asked what their contributions should be in
order to maximize the group’s payoff, exposing them to two situations regarding the contributions
of others. Moreover, we also try to figure out if the frame affects reciprocity depending on subjects’
type. Indeed, Park (2000), who replicated Andreoni (1995)’s frame, found that subjects who are
categorized as individualist according to SVO drive the significant contribution difference between
the two frames. Conversely, there is no differences in contribution between the two frames for
subjects with a prosocial orientation 4 . In order to check whether our data is consistent with
these findings, we conducted a reciprocity analysis based on subjects’ types.

   In the first situation of the Fosgaard et al. (2014) question, subjects were asked what their
contribution would be if the other members of the group did not contribute. In this case, all
subjects in both settings responded that they would not contribute either.

   In the second situation, they were told that other members fully contribute to the public
good. In this case, as it is illustrated in figure 4.13 a vast majority of subjects, respectively
63% in the negative frame and 83% in the positive frame answered that they would also fully
contribute.

    First of all, it should be pointed out that the majority of subjects do not seem to be approa-
ching the game strategically. Their willingness to contribute to the public good depends on the
contributions of others. This result gives credit to the argument developed by Fischbacher et al.
(2001) that most subjects are conditional contributors.
  4. In this experiment, Park (2000) applied an older version of Murphy’s social orientation test.


                                                                    184


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




    However, the negative frame presents both : i) a lower percentage of full contributors and
ii) a higher percentage of free-riders with 19% vs 10% in the positive frame (distribution are
significantly different, p = 0.038 Kolmogorov-Smirnov). If we consider that this answer reflects
the preference for cooperation, we should conclude that the frame impacts the willingness to
cooperate. This result is in line with the finding of Fosgaard et al. (2014), Gächter et al. (2017)
and Gächter et al. (forthcoming), which show that in the take frame, where the collective action
issue is presented as having negative externalities, there are less conditional cooperators.

Figure 4.13 – Stated contribution conditional on others’ full contribution in Monetary sanction experiment
(all data presented in this chapter)


                                                    Positive                                              Negative
                                      100




                                                                                        100
                                      75




                                                                                        75
                             percent of frequency




                                                                               percent of frequency
                                     50




                                                                                       50
                                      25




                                                                                        25
                                      0




                                                                                        0




                                                           No contribution                            In between
                                                           Full contribution




    When we distinguish the framing effect according to the type of subject, we observe that
subjects with an individualistic social orientation are those on whom it has the greatest impact.
Their average contribution to the group account in the first sequence and without sanctions is
significantly smaller in the negative frame (p = 0.070 in the first sequence of Baseline Treatment
and p = 0.004 in the first sequence of the Introduction condition, Mann Whitney). Conversely, we
do not find a significant difference when we do the same analysis for subjects who are categorized
as prosocial. This confirms Park (2000) ’s findings that prosocial subjects do not seem to be
sensitive to framing, whereas individualists are.

    Furthermore, it also seems that individualists react differently to the introduction of sanctions
according to the frame. Indeed, when we compare the average contribution of the individualists
in sequences in which there are material sanctions, we find a significant difference between the
two frames in both conditions (Removal p = 0.048 and Introduction p = 0.000, Mann Whitney).
In comparison, for prosocial, we only find a significant difference in the Introduction condition
(p = 0.000).

    It seems therefore plausible that individualistic subjects are those who induce the difference
in effectiveness of sanctions according to the frame. Once again, it corroborates the fact that
for these subjects, the frame has a stronger impact on their contribution decision. They react
differently to the introduction of sanctions since the beginning.




                                                                        185


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.4.5    Framing, punishment and group payoffs

   Result 3 : Under negative framing sanctions affect negatively group payoff due to lower
contributions and higher sanctions costs.

    Result 3 is supported the panel regressions reported in table 4.9. The variable framing has
a significant positive impact on payoffs. Despite the fact that the introduction of monetary
sanctions generally has a negative effect on payoffs, the interaction variable Sanction × Framing
has a positive effect on payoffs. The introduction of sanction in the positive frame generates
relatively higher payoffs than in the negative frame. This effect is due to the fact that the negative
frame leads to lower contributions to the public good, but also to larger sanctions and
therefore to higher sanctioning costs (as illustrated in figure 4.14). It is mainly observed in the
Introduction condition where reactions to sanctions are extremely different depending on the
frame. In conclusion, the effectiveness of peer’s punishment is reduced by the negative
frame.

   Table 4.9 – Panel regression on individual payoffs in Monetary sanction experiment (random effects).

                                     (1)        (2)         (3)                    (4)             (5)
                                   All data   All data   All data            Without sanction   Sanctions
              Framing               2.791∗ ∗ ∗ 1.660∗ ∗ ∗ 1.152∗∗                 1.303∗∗         4.624∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.533)    (0.549)     (0.572)                (0.566)         (0.961)

              Material sanctions    -0.574∗∗      -2.129∗ ∗ ∗ -2.134∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.228)       (0.310)      (0.310)

              Period                -0.0457∗ ∗ ∗-0.0461∗ ∗ ∗-0.0461∗ ∗ ∗          -0.202∗ ∗ ∗    0.471∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.0166)    (0.0165)     (0.0165)             (0.0205)       (0.0503)

              Material × Framing                  3.319∗ ∗ ∗ 3.329∗ ∗ ∗
                                                 (0.452)     (0.452)

              SVO_score                                         -3.764∗ ∗ ∗       -4.109∗ ∗ ∗     -3.606
                                                               (1.374)           (1.411)         (2.424)

              Gender                                           -0.00265          0.0129           -0.107
                                                                (0.515)          (0.528)         (0.913)

              Age                                               0.0166            0.0247         -0.0379
                                                               (0.0721)          (0.0744)        (0.118)

              Understanding                                     0.519∗ ∗ ∗        0.400∗∗         0.529∗
                                                               (0.178)           (0.183)         (0.305)

              _cons                 23.13∗ ∗ ∗    23.67∗ ∗ ∗    22.37∗ ∗ ∗        24.56∗ ∗ ∗      15.80∗ ∗ ∗
                                   (0.410)       (0.413)       (2.108)           (2.179)         (3.462)
              N                     3760          3760          3760              2480            1280
              R2                    0.043         0.058         0.081             0.070           0.113
              Standard errors in parentheses
              * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                       186


                 Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.10 – Panel regression on individual payoffs discriminating for Removal and Introduction conditions in
Monetary sanction experiment (random effects).

                           (1)                              (2)               (3)                   (4)                     (5)                  (6)
                      Removal + Bsl                    Removal + Bsl     Removal + Bsl      Introduction + Bsl      Introduction + Bsl   Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                  1.817∗ ∗ ∗                       1.352∗            0.764                 2.926∗ ∗ ∗              1.692∗ ∗ ∗           1.537∗∗
                         (0.677)                          (0.694)           (0.706)               (0.649)                 (0.653)              (0.723)

 Material sanctions       -1.361∗ ∗ ∗                      -2.229∗ ∗ ∗        -2.219∗ ∗ ∗        0.00815                  -2.176∗ ∗ ∗          -2.219∗ ∗ ∗
                         (0.389)                          (0.485)            (0.485)             (0.380)                 (0.468)              (0.468)

 Period                   -0.111∗ ∗ ∗                     -0.111∗ ∗ ∗        -0.111∗ ∗ ∗          -0.0903∗ ∗ ∗            -0.0904∗ ∗ ∗         -0.0887∗ ∗ ∗
                         (0.0245)                        (0.0245)           (0.0245)             (0.0247)                (0.0244)             (0.0244)

 Material × Framing                                        1.861∗ ∗ ∗         1.855∗ ∗ ∗                                  4.645∗ ∗ ∗           4.651∗ ∗ ∗
                                                          (0.625)            (0.624)                                     (0.594)              (0.593)

 SVO_score                                                                    -4.315∗∗                                                         -3.780∗∗
                                                                             (1.720)                                                          (1.741)

 Gender                                                                       -0.402                                                           -0.296
                                                                             (0.659)                                                          (0.626)

 Age                                                                         -0.0567                                                           0.177∗
                                                                            (0.0907)                                                          (0.0966)

 Understanding                                                                0.514∗∗                                                          0.274
                                                                             (0.222)                                                          (0.236)

 _cons                    24.24∗ ∗ ∗                       24.45∗ ∗ ∗         25.34∗ ∗ ∗          23.54∗ ∗ ∗              24.12∗ ∗ ∗           20.61∗ ∗ ∗
                         (0.565)                          (0.569)            (2.694)             (0.493)                 (0.488)              (2.831)
 N                        2400                             2400               2400                2560                    2560                 2560
 R2                       0.026                            0.030              0.062               0.052                   0.080                0.105
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                        P cost of P
   The total sanctioning cost presented in figure 4.14 represents the total       payoffs decrease
due to the sanctions received and the total cost of sending sanctions ( pij + 3 pji ).
                                         2,000 1,500
                                Sanctions'cost
                                  1,000  500
                                         0




                                                                 Removal                          Introduction

                                                                     Negative Framing            Positive Framing




                           Figure 4.14 – Total cost of monetary sanctions by framing.




                                                                                 187


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.5     Discussion

    In this experiment, we replicate Andreoni (1995) ’s frame of the voluntary contribution me-
chanism with the addition of monetary sanctions (Fehr and Gächter, 2000). We control for the
order effect by applying these monetary sanctions from the first period of the voluntary contri-
bution mechanism and removing them in the second sequence or introducing them only in the
second sequence. Our results show that highlighting the potential positive or negative effects
for the same collective action problem has an impact on the subjects’ willingness to cooperate.
In this sense, we corroborate Andreoni (1995)’s argument that individuals are more inclined to
cooperate if they perceive that they are doing good than to prevent harming (warm glow vs cold
prickle effects).

    Monetary sanctions significantly increase contributions with respect to the baseline condition,
for both frames, and whenever they are introduced. The number of sanctions sent is slightly higher
in the negative frame. Nevertheless, the drivers of punishment are identical in both frames.
Comparison with peers is decisive in the decision to send sanctions. The likelihood of being
punished and the severity of the sentence are mainly determined by having a relatively lower
contribution than peers. These results seem to partially substantiate Carpenter (2006) ’s thesis,
according to which team production is carried by strong contributors who also support the cost
of monitoring.

    However, we find that framing strongly affects the efficiency of sanctions. In the positive
frame, they lead to a significantly higher increase in contributions. It is even more obvious in the
Introduction condition in which they lead the vast majority of the groups to fully contribute and
though until the last period of the game. Conversely, under negative framing, monetary sanctions
lead to a contribution increase that reaches half of the endowment on average.

    This different reaction to sanctions is observed since the first period after their introduction
and before subjects eventually receive their first sanctions. Indeed, in the positive frame, 34
percent of the subjects become full contributors. This percentage rise to reach 84 percent in the
last period of the experiment. In the negative frame, only 22 percent of subjects become full
contributors in the first period after the introduction of sanctions, and this percentage remains
constant until the last period. Paradoxically, the number of sanctions sent is higher in the negative
frame. Low contributors are less willing to increase their contributions in this frame.

     We contend that negative framing presents the game in a more complex way, making it more
difficult to understand. This is evidenced by the fact that in the negative frame, participants
initially have more difficulties in correctly estimating payoffs, getting lower understanding scores.
It has been shown that the level of details about the payoffs structure, and so the ease with which
subjects can determine the economic incentives, affect cooperation. Saijo and Nakamura (1995) ’s,
experiment demonstrates that providing more details about the payoffs structure makes subjects
more likely to behave as predicted by standard theory, and there is less spite. More recently,
Ramalingam et al. (2018), showed that lower details about the payoffs structure lead to a lower
contribution to the public good but also higher levels of sanctions sent. If subjects have more
difficulties to figure out the earnings, they are more likely to behave in an antisocial way, being
more spiteful.

   Nevertheless, framing cannot be reduced to a difference of understanding, in the sense that
subjects have more difficulties initially to figure out the payoffs structure. First, during the
comprehension questionnaire, they are informed about the right answer after each question,

                                                188


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




followed by a short explanation. Second, at the end of every period, subjects receive detailed
feedback about their payoffs and therefore get experienced about the economic incentives. Third,
we control for the comprehension score in every analysis. Thus, while it affects contributions and
payoffs, it remains a marginal explanatory factor. Finally, at the end of the experiment, we asked
subjects how much they should invest in the group account in order to make the highest possible
group payoff when their peers invest their whole endowment. In both frames, the majority of
subjects answered that they would fully contribute. This outcome is even more questioning, as
we never observed a majority of subjects fully contributing under the negative framing.

    Our results suggest that subject’s behaviors concerning public good contribution or reaction
to punishment, strongly depends on their perception of the behavior of their peers. Presenting
others’ actions as having negative effects on one’s payoffs impacts their reactions to sanctions.
We find that the positive frame enables subjects to coordinate on full contribution, which is one
of the possible equilibrium under peer punishment if there is a sufficient number of subjects who
are inequality averse (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999). This equilibrium is not reached in the negative
frame. We also explain the weaker framing effect on sanctions’ efficiency in the Removal condition
by the fact that in these treatments, subjects can early express their expectations about others’
actions. Indeed, in these treatments, subjects receive signals of willingness to cooperate from
the outset, which can alleviate their misperceptions about the actions of others. In comparison,
when the perception created by the frame gets reinforced during a sequence in which they cannot
express social disapproval, we do observe strong differences in the reaction to peers’ pressure.

    Given that people have limited rationality, specifically limited computational skills, it seems
crucial to better understand how their perceptions of a collective action problem, and the ef-
fects of the actions of their peers, can influence their behavior. It seems relevant to think that
the information strongly influences their perceptions. Nikiforakis (2010) demonstrates that the
type of information feedback delivered influences subjects’ behavior. When they get information
about other’s contributions and earnings, groups also have more difficulties in establishing a
common norm of contribution. Putting more attention in these aspects is needed to improve our
understanding about the sensitivity of mechanisms, that are known to strengthen cooperation
to institutional changes.




                                               189


           Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




References

   ALESINA, A., STANTCHEVA, S. & TESO, E. 2018. Intergenerational mobility and prefe-
rences for redistribution. American Economic Review, 108, 521-54.

   ANDREONI, J. 1995. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : the effects of positive and negative
framing on cooperation in experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1-21.

   CARPENTER, J. P. 2007. The demand for punishment. Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 62, 522-542.

   CARPENTER, J., BOWLES, S., GINTIS, H., HWANG, S.-H. 2009. Strong reciprocity and
team production : Theory and evidence. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 71,
221-232.

   CARPENTER, J. P., BOWLES, S., GINTIS, H. 2006. Mutual monitoring in teams : Theory
and experimental evidence on the importance of reciprocity. IZA Discussion Papers, No. 2106.

    CARTWRIGHT, E. 2016. A comment on framing effects in linear public good games. Journal
of the Economic Science Association, 2, 73-84.

   CARTWRIGHT, E. & RAMALINGAM, A. 2019. Framing effects in public good games :
Choices or externalities ? Economics Letters, 179, 42-45.

    CHAUDHURI, A. 2011. Sustaining cooperation in laboratory public goods experiments : a
selective survey of the literature. Experimental Economics, 14, 47-83.

   COX, C. A. 2015. Decomposing the effects of negative framing in linear public goods games.
Economics Letters, 126, 63-65.

    CROSETTO, P., WEISEL, O., WINTER, F. 2012. A flexible z-Tree implementation of the
social value orientation slider measure (Murphy et al. 2011)–manual. Jena Economic Research
Paper, 62.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M., GÄCHTER, S. 2011a. Framing and free riding : emotional
responses and punishment in social dilemma games. Experimental Economics, 14, 254-272.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M., GÄCHTER, S., KABALIN, R. 2011b. Moral judgments
in social dilemmas : How bad is free riding ? Journal of Public Economics, 95, 253-264.

   DUGAR, S. 2010. Nonmonetary sanctions and rewards in an experimental coordination game.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 73, 377-386.

   DUGAR, S. 2013. Non-monetary incentives and opportunistic behavior : Evidence from a
laboratory public good game. Economic Inquiry, 51, 1374-1388.

   DUFWENBERG, M., GÄCHTER, S., HENNIG-SCHMIDT, H. 2011. The framing of games
and the psychology of play. Games and Economic Behavior, 73, 459-478.

   FEHR, E. & FISCHBACHER, U. 2004. Social norms and human cooperation. Trends in

                                            190


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




cognitive sciences, 8, 185-190.

   FEHR, E. & GÄCHTER, S. 2000. Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Experi-
ments. The American Economic Review, 90, 980-994.

   FEHR, E. & GÄCHTER, S. 2002. Altruistic punishment in humans. Nature, 415, 137-140.

   FEHR, E. & SCHMIDT, K. M. 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
Quarterly journal of Economics, 817-868.

   FISCHBACHER, U. 2007. z-Tree : Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments.
Experimental economics, 10, 171-178.

    FOSGAARD, T. R., HANSEN, L. G., WENGSTRÖM, E. 2014. Understanding the nature
of cooperation variability. Journal of Public Economics, 120, 134-143.

   FUJIMOTO, H., PARK, E.-S. 2010. Framing effects and gender differences in voluntary
public goods provision experiments. The Journal of Socio-Economics, 39, 455-457.

    GÄCHTER, S., KOELLE, F., QUERCIA, S. 2017. Reciprocity and the tragedies of main-
taining and providing the commons Nature Human Behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9),
650-656.

   KAHNEMAN, D. 1992. Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed feelings. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51, 296-312.

    KHADJAVI, M., LANGE, A. 2015. Doing good or doing harm : experimental evidence on
giving and taking in public good games. Experimental Economics, 18, 432-441.

    KUZIEMKO, I., NORTON, M. I., SAEZ, E. & STANTCHEVA, S. 2015. How elastic are pre-
ferences for redistribution ? Evidence from randomized survey experiments. American Economic
Review, 105, 1478-1508.

   LEVIN, I. P., SCHNEIDER, S. L., GAETH, G. J. 1998. All Frames Are Not Created Equal : A
Typology and Critical Analysis of Framing Effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 76, 149-188.

    MASCLET, D., NOUSSAIR, C., TUCKER, S., VILLEVAL, M.-C. 2003. Monetary and non-
monetary punishment in the voluntary contributions mechanism. The American Economic Re-
view, 93, 366-380.

    MESSER, K. D., SUTER, J. F. & YAN, J. 2013. Context effects in a negatively framed social
dilemma experiment. Environmental and Resource Economics, 55, 387-405.

    MESSER, K. D., ZARGHAMEE, H., KAISER, H. M. & SCHULZE, W. D. 2007. New hope
for the voluntary contributions mechanism : The effects of context. Journal of Public Economics,
91, 1783-1799.

    MURPHY, R. O., ACKERMANN, K. A. & HANDGRAAF, M. 2011. Measuring social value
orientation. Judgment and Decision Making, 6, 771-781.


                                              191


           Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




  NIKIFORAKIS, N. 2010. Feedback, punishment and cooperation in public good experiments.
Games and Economic Behavior, 68, 689-702.

    OSTROM, E. 1990. Governing the commons : The evolution of institutions for collective
action, Cambridge : Cambridge University Press.

   OSTROM, E., GARDNER, R., WALKER, J. 1994. Rules, games, and common-pool resources,
University of Michigan Press.

    PARK, E.-S. 2000. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : a further experimental study of framing
effects on free-riding. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 43, 405-421.

    RAMALINGAM, A., MORALES, A. J., WALKER, J. M. 2018. Varying experimental ins-
tructions to improve comprehension : punishment in public goods games. Journal of behavioral
and experimental economics, 73, 66-73.

    RAMALINGAM, A., MORALES, A. J. & WALKER, J. M. 2019. Peer punishment of acts
of omission versus acts of commission in give and take social dilemmas. Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization, 164, 133-147

   SAIJO, T., NAKAMURA, H. 1995. The “Spite” Dilemma in Voluntary Contribution Mecha-
nism Experiments. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 39, 535-560.

   SEFTON, M., SHUPP, R. & WALKER, J. M. 2007. The effect of rewards and sanctions in
provision of public goods. Economic inquiry, 45, 671-690.

   TVERSKY, A., KAHNEMAN, D. 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science, 211, 453-458.

   WILLINGER, M. & ZIEGELMEYER, A. 1999. Framing and cooperation in public good
games : an experiment with an interior solution. Economics letters, 65, 323-328.




                                            192


                                                           Appendices of chapter 3




4.A     Instructions

    Here are presented the translation of the experiment instructions we used. There were given
in french originally.


4.A.1    Announcement

   The experiment you are about to participate aims to study decision making.

    Please read the instructions carefully. They should help you understand the experiment. Once
all participants have read it, an experimenter will read them aloud.

   All your decisions will be treated anonymously. You will indicate your choices on the computer
you are sitting in front of.

   From now on, we ask you not to speak anymore. If you have a question, raise your hand and
an experimenter will come and answer you in private.

   Over the course of the experiment, you will accumulate earnings expressed in the experimental
currency unit (ECU).

   At the end of the experiment, your ECU will be converted into euros at a conversion rate
which is specified at the end of these instructions.

    The experiment has three parts. The attached instructions are those in Part 1. The ins-
tructions in part 2, then 3 will be distributed at the end of the previous games.




                                              193


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.A.2    Public good game

Investment game


                                  A.1.1.1 Negative Frame


   This experiment is a study of group and individual investment behavior. The instructions are
simple. If you follow them carefully and make good investment decisions, you may earn a non
negligible amount of money. The money you earn will be paid to you, in euros, at the end of the
experiment.


         MAKING CASH EARNING FROM YOUR INVESTMENT RETURN


    In the experiment you will make a series of 10 investment decisions. For each investment
decision you will be placed in a group of four other subjects (you included). The group compo-
sition will remain the same during all this game. Your investment returns will depend on the
investment decison that you and the other three members of your group make.

    Each investment decision you make will result in an investment return. Your investment
return from each decision will be turned into cash earnings. The exchange rate is 0.025. Meaning
that 100 ECU equal 2.5 euros. For example, if your investment return from one investment
decision is 30 ECU, your earnings will be 0.75 euros. If your investement return is 20 ECU, your
earnings will be 0.5 euros. In the following pages, we will describe how your investment returns
are determined.


                         THE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES


   You have been assigned to a group of 4 people. Each person will get an endowment of 20
tokens. You will have to choose how to divide your tokens between two investment opportunities :


                                1. The Individual Exchange


   Every token you invest in the Individual Exchange will yield you a return of one ECU.
However, each token you invest in the individual exchange will reduce the earnings of every
other players by 0.4 ECU.

    Example : Suppose you invested 20 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 20 ECU. However, each of the three other members of your group would have their
earnings reduced by 8 each.

    Example : Suppose you invested 10 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 10 ECU. However, each of the three other members of your group would have their
earnings reduced by 4 each.


                                              194


           Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




    Example : Suppose you invested 0 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
no return for this exchange. Likewise, the other three members of your group would not have
their earnings reduced.

   It will also be true that when the other members of your group invest in the Individual
Exchange, then your earnings will be reduced by 0.4 times their investment in the Individual
exchange. This is illustrated below :

    Example : Suppose that the other 3 members of your group invested a total of 35 tokens in
the Individual Exchange. Then this would reduce your earnings by 14 ECU.

    Example : Suppose that the other 3 members of your group invested a total of 35 tokens in
the Individual Exchange. Then this would reduce your earnings by 12 ECU.

   Example : Suppose that the other 3 members of your group invested no tokens the Individual
Exchange. Then this would not reduce your earnings at all.


                                 2. The Group Exchange


   Every token you invest in the Group Exchange yields a return of 0.4 for you. The other
menbers of your group are not affected by your investment in the Group Exchange.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest no tokens in the Group Exchange. Then your
return from the Group Exchange would be 0.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest 10 tokens in the Group Exchange. Then your
return from the Group Exchange would be 4.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest 20 tokens in the Group Exchange. Then your
return from the Group Exchange would be 8.


                                   Automatic Earnings


    In addition to the earnings you accumulate from the Individual Exchange and the Group
Exchange, you will also get automatic earnings each round. These automatic earnings will not
depend on any decisions you make, and will be the same each round. Your automatic earnings
will be 24 ECU each round. Hence, your total earnings each round will be your earnings from
the Individual Exchange plus your earnings from the Group Exchange plus 24 ECU in automatic
earnings.


                                 The Investment Decision


   Your task is to decide how many of your tokens to invest in the Individual Exchange and
how many to invest in the Group Exchange. You are free to put some tokens into the Indivudal
Exchange and some into the Group Exchange. Alternatively, you can put all of them into the
Group Exchange or all of them into the Individual Exchange.

                                            195


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                 Your Investment Account


   You and every other member of your group will get an endowment of 20 tokens every period.
The total number of tokens in each group in every period is 80.


                                    Stages of Investment


    During 10 periods, you will be asked to make investment decision. In every period, the sum
of your investment decisions has to be equal to your endowment 20 tokens.

   In every period, you will get a EARNINGS REPORT.

    This earnings report tells you the total investment in the Group Exchange, your investment
return, and your cash earnings. Your Earnings Report does not tell you the investment decisions
or earnings of the other members of your group. YOUR INVESTMENT DECISIONS AND
EARNINGS ARE CONFIDENTIAL.


                                         Your Group


   The composition of your group will remain the same during this game. In every period,
you will interact with the 3 same people.

   At no point in the experiment will the identities of the other members of the group be made
known to you, nor will your identity be made know to them.


                                    Your Cash Earnings


   Your investment return determines your earnings in euros. For example, if you get 100 ECU,
your earnings will be 2.5 euros.


                                       GOOD LUCK !




                                             196


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                  A.1.1.2. Positive Frame


   The positive frame instructions are identical to the negative frame, except for the investment
opportunities and the automatic earning.


                         THE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES


   You have been assigned to a group of 4 people. Each person will get an endowment of 20
tokens. You will have to choose how to divide your tokens between two investment opportunities :


                                 1. The Individual Exchange


   Every token you invest in the Individual Exchange will yield you a return of one ECU. The
other members of your group are not affected by your investment in the Individual Exchange.

    Example : Suppose you invested 20 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 20 ECU.

    Example : Suppose you invested 10 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
a return of 10 ECU.

   Example : Suppose you invested 0 tokens in the Individual Exchange. Then you would get
no return for this exchange.


                                   2. The Group Exchange


    Your return from the Group Exhange will depend on the total number of tokens that you
and the other three members of your group invest in the Group Exchange. The more the group
invests in the Group Exchange, the greater the return to each member of the group.

   Every token invested in the Group Exchange yields a return of 0.4 for each member of the
group, not just the person who invested it.

    Example : Suppose that you decided to invest 0 tokens in the Group Exchange, but that the
three other members invested a total of 30 tokens. Then your return from the Group Exchange
would be 12 ECU. Everyone else in your group would also get a return of 12.

    Example : Suppose that you invested 10 tokens in the Group Exchange, but that the other
three members of the group invest 30 tokens. This makes a total of 40 tokens. Your return from
the Group Exchange would be 16. The other three members of the group would also get a return
of 16.

    Example : Suppose that you invested 20 tokens in the Group Exchange, but that the other
three members of the group invest nothing. Then you, and everyone else in the group, would get
a return from the Group Exchange of 8 .

                                              197


           Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




   As you can see, every token invested in the Group Exchange will yield a return of 0.4 for
every member of the group, not just the person who invested it. It does no matter who invests
tokens in the Group Exchange. Everyone will get a return from every token invested whether
they invest in the Group Exchange or not.




                                            198


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




Peer sanctions


   During this game, you stay with the same group, you are interacting with the same people
than in the precedent game.

   The functioning of the two accounts, the conversion rate are the same than in the
precedent experiment. The earnings you will get in this game will be added to thoses of the
two precedents games.

   This experiment also has 10 periods. However, each period is composed by two stages :

   — The first stage is identical to the action you made during a period in the precedent
     experiment : you have to decide how much tokens you invest in the Individual Exchange
     and in the Group Exchange. In the same way, when all the members of your group have
     taken their decisions, the SUMMARY screen is displayed. This screen reminds you of the
     same information as in the previous section.
   — During the second stage, after having taken note of the investment decisions of each
     of the other 3 members of your group in the Group Exchange, you may decide to send
     them sanction points.

   Description of the second stage

    You get informed about the amount that each of the three other members contributed in
the Group Exchange in the first stage of the game. Please notice that the order in which the
decisions of the three other members of your group are displayed, is randomly modified every
period. Thereby, the investment of the first "Other member" which will appear on your screen,
will not be the same individual each time. It will be the same for the invesments which appear
in the second and the third place.

    You have to take a decision about the number of sanction points you send to each of the
three members of your group. You can impose untill 5 sanctions points to each of your
group members every period. Likewise, every other member of your group can impose
you sanction points every period. For every subject, you must enter a value between 0 and 5
points. If you do not want to decrease the earnings of another subject, you must enter 0.

    If you send sanctions points, you incur a cost that depends on the total number of points
sent. Every sanction point you send to a member of your group, cost you 1 ECU. Your cost of
sanction send is equal to the sum of the points sent to every member of your group.

     Every sanction point received, decreases the earning of the first stage by 3 ECU. As an
example, if a member of the group receives a total of 3 sanctions points, his earning from the
first stage will decreased by 9 ECU. if he receives a total of 4 sanctions points, his earnings from
the first satge will decreased by 12 ECU.

    Nevertheless, there is an execption to this rule. If the cost of the total number of penalties
received by a group member exceeds his Stage 1 win, his Step 1 win is considered nil. However,
even in this case this group member has to bear the cost of the sanctions he has sent.

   Your final earnings in each period is computed this way :



                                                199


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




 If your earnings at the first stage is higher or equal to the total cost of the sanctions points
 received.
 Period Earnings = earnings in the first stage −3× (number of sanctions received) −1×
 (number of sanction sent)
 If your earnings at the first stage is lower than the total cost of the sanctions points received.
 Period Earnings = 0 −1× (number of sanction sent)
Please note that your period gain at the end of step 2 may be negative, if the cost of the number
of points you have sent exceeds your gain in step 1 minus the cost of points received.

    Once all group members have made their decisions, your screen will display your total number
of sanction points received, your total sanction points sent, and the associated costs ; as well as
your gain for the period.




                                               200


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.A.3    Social Value Orientation test

   In this experiment, you have to decide how to share an amont between you and "another
person". This other person is in this room, and will be randomly selected at the end of the
experiment. You cannot identify her and she cannot identify you. All your choices are completely
confidential.

    Concretely, you have to select one between 9 distributions proposed. There are no right or
wrong answers. You have to choose the distribution you prefered. You have to make this choice
15 times through 15 screens that present differents distribution proposal.

   Once all the people present in this room, have answer the question, the computer will ran-
domly select one of the 15 propositions. This will be paid depending of your choice. The part
dedicated to the "other person" will be sent to a subject selected randomly.

   You will also receive the "Other Person" share resulting from the choices of another individual
present in this room who will also be selected randomly at the end of the game.

   The results of this experiment will be communicated to you at the end of the session, and
you will receive at that time the amount corresponding to your winnings.

    In this experiment we used an experimental currency : ECU. The ECU you accumulate during
the experiment will be converted into euros with a conversion rate of 0.025. One hundred ECU
will therefore correspond to 2.5 euros.




                                               201


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.A.4    Understanding questions

   1. How many players are they in your group (including yourself) ?
   — i. 3 players
   — ii. 4 players
   — iii. 5 players
   Answer posted : The correct answer was 4 people : you and 3 other members

    2. Do the composition of your groupe change every period ?
    — i. Right
    — ii. Wrong
    Answer posted : The correct answer was Wrong. You keep the same group during the 10
periods of this game.

   3. How many tokens do you individually have to invest every period between the Individual
Exchange and the Group Exchange ?
   — i. 20 tokens
   — ii. 80 tokens
   — iii. It depends on previous periods
   Answer posted : Every period you must invest 20 tokens between the Group account and the
Individual account.

    4. If none of the four members of your group (including you) invest in the Group account,
and therefore each member invests 20 tokens in the Individual account : What is your return on
investment for the period ?
    — i. 0 ECU
    — ii. 20 ECU
    — iii. 24 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * 0 = 0 ECU. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 20 = 20 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 0
+ 20 = 20 ECU.

   Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * 0 = 0 ECU. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 20 - 0.4 * (20 * 3) = -4 ECU. In addition, each period you
benefit from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 0 - 4 +
24 = 20 ECU.

    5. If each of the four members of your group (including you) invests 20 tokens in the Group
account, and therefore no member invests in the individual account : What is your return on
investment for the period ?
    — i. 0 ECU
    — ii. 20 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (20 * 4) = 32
ECU. Via the Individual account you get 1 * 0 = 0 ECU. Your return on investment for the
period is 32 + 0 = 32 ECU.

   Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (20) = 8 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 0 - 0.4 * 0 = 0 ECU. In addition, each period you benefit
from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 8 + 0 + 24 =

                                              202


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




32 ECU.

    6. If the sum of the investments in the group account of the other 3 members is 30 tokens,
and therefore 30 tokens in the individual account ; What do you decide to invest 0 tokens in the
Group account and 20 tokens in the individual account : What is your return on investment for
the period ?
    — i. 20 ECU
    — ii. 26 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (30) = 12 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 20 = 20 ECU. Your return on investment for the period
is 20 + 12 = 32 ECU.

    Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (0) = 0 ECU. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 20 - 0.4 * 30 = 8 ECU. In addition, each period you benefit
from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 0 + 8 + 24 =
32 ECU.

    7. If the sum of the investments in the group account of the other 3 members is 30 tokens,
and therefore 30 tokens in the individual account ; that you decide to invest 20 tokens in the
Group account and 0 tokens in the individual account : What is your return on investment for
the period ?
    — i. 20 ECU
    — ii. 26 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (20 + 30) = 20
ECU. Via the Individual account you get 1 * 0 = 0 ECU. Your return on investment for the
period is 20 + 0 = 20 ECU.

    Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * 20 = 8 ECU. Via
the Individual account you get 1 * 0 - 0,4 * 30 = -12 ECU. In addition, each period you benefit
from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment for the period is 8 - 12 + 24 =
20 ECU.

    8. If the sum of the investments in the group account of the other 3 members is 30 tokens,
and therefore 30 tokens in the individual account ; you invest 10 tokens in the Group account
and 10 in the Individual account : What is your return on investment for the period ?
    — i. 20 ECU
    — ii. 26 ECU
    — iii. 32 ECU
    Answer posted [POSITIVE FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (40) = 16 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 10 = 10 ECU. Your return on investment for the period
is 16 + 10 = 26 ECU.

   Answer posted [NEGATIF FRAME] : Via the Group account you get 0.4 * (10) = 4 ECU.
Via the Individual account you get 1 * 10 - 0,4 * 30 = -2 ECU. In addition, each period you
benefit from an automatic gain of 24 ECU. Your return on investment is 4 - 2 + 24 = 26 ECU.




                                              203


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.B     Characteristics of Experimental Sessions for monetary sanc-
        tions experiment

  Table 4.B.1 – Characteristics of experimental sessions in Monetary sanction experiment

 Session Number     Number of Subjects   Number of groups   Framing    Periods 1-10   Periods 11-20
        1                  20                   5           Negative     Baseline       Sanction
        3                  16                   4           Negative     Baseline       Sanction
        6                  16                   4           Negative    Sanction        Baseline
        12                 16                   4           Negative    Sanction        Baseline
        2                  20                   5           Positive     Baseline       Sanction
        4                  12                   3           Positive     Baseline       Sanction
        5                  16                   4           Positive    Sanction        Baseline
        11                 12                   3           Positive    Sanction        Baseline
        7                  16                   4           Negative     Baseline       Baseline
        9                  16                   4           Negative     Baseline       Baseline
        8                  16                   4           Positive     Baseline       Baseline
        10                 12                   3           Positive     Baseline       Baseline



4.C     Description of demographics variables for monetary sanc-
        tions experiment

    Looking at gender and age there are no differences between frame (chi2 tests). There are
neither differences between frame concerning the social value orientations of subjects (ttest).

   Presentation of gender by framing.

         Table 4.C.1 – Gender summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment

        Treatment                  Number of women                          Chi 2 p-value
                                   Negative Framing    Positive Framing
        Baseline Treatment         15(/32)             15(/28)              0.605
        Introduction condition     18(/36)             14(/32)              0.606
        Removal condition          17(/32)             7(/28)               0.027
        All data                   50(/100)            36(/88)              0.212



    Looking at the understanding score obtained by framing, we clearly see that the negative
frame leads to lower understanding level. This difference is significant doing ttest and Epps-
singleton test. There is an higher complexity in the negative frame, due to more sources of
earning. This may account for the increased difficulty subjects have in establishing gain in this
framing.




                                               204


       Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




      Table 4.C.2 – Age summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment

   Treatment                  Framing     Obs    Mean       Std. Dev.         t-test
   Baseline Treatment         Negative    32     22.375       3.377       non-significant
                              Positive    28     21.821       2.48
   Introduction condition     Negative    36     22.833       3.517       non-significant
                              Positive    32     22.719       3.391
   Removal condition          Negative    32     23.406       4.812       non-significant
                              Positive    28     22.25        3.362
   All data                   Negative    100     22.87       3.920       non-significant
                              Positive    88     22.284       3.107




  Table 4.C.3 – SVO_score summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment

Treatment                 Framing    Obs    Mean       Std. Dev.   Epps Singleton p-value
Baseline Treatment        Negative   32     0.506        0.195             0.768
                          Positive   28     0.524        0.182
Introduction condition    Negative   36     0.438        0.171                0.529
                          Positive   32     0.509        0.181
Removal condition         Negative   32     0.477        0.206                0.661
                          Positive   28     0.439        0.181
All data                  Negative   100    0.472        0.190                0.716
                          Positive   88     0.491        0.183




   Table 4.C.4 – SVO type summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment

     Treatment                 Framing     Prosocial      Individualist   Competitive
     Baseline Treatment        Negative       14               17             1
                               Positive       15               13             0
     Introduction condition    Negative       11               23             2
                               Positive       15               17             0
     Removal condition         Negative       12               18             2
                               Positive       9                17             2
     All data                  Negative       37               58             5
                               Positive       39               47             2




                                           205


           Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                             Negative framing                               Positive framing




                             50




                                                                              50
                             45




                                                                              45
                             40




                                                                              40
                             35




                                                                              35
                                 30




                                                                                  30
                         Frequency




                                                                          Frequency
                            25




                                                                             25
                             20




                                                                              20
                             15




                                                                              15
                             10




                                                                              10
                             5




                                                                              5
                             0




                                                                              0
                                      2        4            6         8                2      4            6     8
                                              Understanding                                  Understanding




          Figure 4.C.1 – Comprehension score by framing in Monetary sanction experiment.



      Table 4.C.5 – Understanding summary statisticsin Monetary sanction experiment

    Treatment                             Framing               Obs       Mean             Std. Dev.           Epps-Singleton p-value
    Baseline Treatment                    Negative              32        5.406              1.292                     0.003
                                          Positive              28        6.607              1.397
    Introduction condition                Negative              36        5.028              1.028                     0.000
                                          Positive              32        6.594              1.643
    Removal condition                     Negative              32        5.188              1.491                     0.028
                                          Positive              28         5.75              1.669
    All data                              Negative              100         5.2              1.271                     0.000
                                          Positive              88        6.329              1.609



4.D     Non parametric tests on group contribution to public good
        for monetary sanctions experiment

    The following Mann Whitney tests compare the framing effect for given conditions (under a
defined treatment and sequence).

               Table 4.D.1 – Mann Whitney test in Monetary sanction experiment

                            Treatment                                                              Mann Whitney p-value
           Baseline Treatment     Sequence                            1   Baseline                 0.004
                                  Sequence                            2   Baseline                 0.350
           Introduction condition Sequence                            1   Baseline                 0.021
                                  Sequence                            2   Sanctions                0.002
           Removal condition      Sequence                            1   Sanctions                0.355
                                  Sequence                            2   Baseline                 0.643

    The following Wilcoxon tests compare the contributions between Sequence 1 and Sequence 2
for a given treatment and framing.



                                                                      206


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



                    Table 4.D.2 – Wilcoxon tests in Monetary sanction experiment

                         Treatment                       Framing            Wilcoxon p-value
                         Baseline Treatment              Negative           0.017**
                                                         Positive           0.237
                         Introduction condition          Negative           0.086*
                                                         Positive           0.012**
                         Removal condition               Negative           0.012**
                                                         Positive           0.028**


4.E      Robustness analysis for monetary sanctions experiment

    In order to make a robtness check, we present here panel tobit estimation without the in-
teraction variable Framing × Sanction and also panel analysis with clusters by group. These
results also confirmed the positive effect of sanction introduction on public good contribution.
Moreover, we also confirmed that when sanctions are introduced in sequence 2 their marginal
effect on public good contribution are higher in the positive frame.


4.E.1     Supplementary analysis for monetary sanctions experiment

Table 4.E.1 – Individual contributions to the group account in Monetary sanction experiment (panel regression
random effects with clusters by group).

                                      (1)        (2)        (3)                      (4)              (5)
                                    All data   All data   All data             Without sanctions   Sanctions
               Framing               3.572∗ ∗ ∗ 2.775∗ ∗ ∗ 2.263∗∗                  2.721∗ ∗ ∗       4.364∗ ∗ ∗
                                    (0.949)    (0.975)    (0.969)                  (0.968)          (1.558)

               Material sanctions     6.277∗ ∗ ∗ 5.180∗ ∗ ∗ 5.206∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.785)    (1.027)    (1.028)

               Period                -0.182∗ ∗ ∗ -0.182∗ ∗ ∗ -0.182∗ ∗ ∗            -0.339∗ ∗ ∗     0.0391
                                    (0.0489)    (0.0479)    (0.0480)               (0.0484)         (0.102)

               Material × Framing                   2.342         2.356
                                                   (1.539)       (1.537)

               SVO_score                                          6.641∗ ∗ ∗         6.929∗ ∗ ∗      3.615
                                                                 (1.720)            (1.843)         (2.264)

               Gender                                             0.398              0.343          -0.0100
                                                                 (0.528)            (0.567)         (0.793)

               Age                                                -0.0183           0.0162          -0.0178
                                                                 (0.0731)          (0.0653)         (0.121)

               Understanding                                      0.359∗            -0.0357          0.940∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                 (0.197)            (0.183)         (0.287)

               _cons                  6.817∗ ∗ ∗    7.192∗ ∗ ∗    2.401              5.180∗∗         3.874
                                     (0.676)       (0.686)       (2.512)            (2.483)         (3.687)
               N                      3760          3760          3760               2480            1280
               R2                     0.217         0.225         0.255              0.127           0.184
               Standard errors in parentheses
               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                          207


                 Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.E.2 – Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction
conditions in Monetary sanction experiment (panel regression random effects with clusters by group).

                           (1)              (2)              (3)                      (4)                     (5)                    (6)
                      Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl    Removal + Bsl         Introduction + Bsl      Introduction + Bsl     Introduction + Bsl
 Framing                  2.106∗           2.259∗           2.146                    2.826∗ ∗ ∗              2.826∗ ∗ ∗             1.895∗∗
                         (1.248)          (1.350)          (1.312)                  (0.903)                 (0.903)                (0.865)

 Material sanction        4.280∗ ∗ ∗       4.565∗ ∗ ∗          4.612∗ ∗ ∗            5.702∗ ∗ ∗                5.702∗ ∗ ∗          5.796∗ ∗ ∗
                         (1.011)          (1.275)             (1.274)               (1.640)                   (1.640)             (1.652)

 Period                  -0.282∗ ∗ ∗      -0.282∗ ∗ ∗          -0.280∗ ∗ ∗           -0.271∗ ∗ ∗               -0.271∗ ∗ ∗         -0.274∗ ∗ ∗
                        (0.0481)         (0.0482)             (0.0483)              (0.0512)                  (0.0512)            (0.0514)

 Material × Framing                        -0.612              -0.577                5.008∗∗                   5.008∗∗             4.981∗∗
                                          (1.946)             (1.943)               (1.979)                   (1.979)             (1.984)

 SVO_score                                                     6.031∗ ∗ ∗                                                          9.039∗ ∗ ∗
                                                              (2.341)                                                             (1.833)

 Gender                                                       0.0358                                                               0.884
                                                              (0.680)                                                             (0.663)

 Age                                                           -0.0687                                                            0.00830
                                                              (0.0926)                                                            (0.0730)

 Understanding                                                 0.126                                                               0.381∗
                                                              (0.240)                                                             (0.223)

 _cons                    8.746∗ ∗ ∗       8.675∗ ∗ ∗          6.562∗                7.819∗ ∗ ∗                7.819∗ ∗ ∗          0.979
                         (0.793)          (0.801)             (3.440)               (0.634)                   (0.634)             (2.712)
 N                        2400             2400                2400                  2560                      2560                2560
 R2                       0.189            0.189               0.215                 0.256                     0.256               0.301
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




Table 4.E.3 – Individual contributions to the group account without interaction variable in Monetary sanction
experiment (panel regression random effects with clusters by group).

                                                      (1)            (2)                          (3)
                                                    All data    Removal + Bsl             Introduction + Bsl
                          Framing                    3.065∗ ∗ ∗     2.001∗                       3.163∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.950)        (1.214)                      (0.920)

                          Material sanctions         6.309∗ ∗ ∗           4.344∗ ∗ ∗                8.140∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.785)              (1.014)                   (1.202)

                          Period                     -0.182∗ ∗ ∗          -0.280∗ ∗ ∗               -0.274∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.0490)             (0.0483)                  (0.0514)

                          SVO_score                  6.647∗ ∗ ∗           6.058∗ ∗ ∗                9.333∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (1.712)              (2.333)                   (1.790)

                          Gender                     0.337               0.0608                     0.828
                                                    (0.531)              (0.673)                   (0.686)

                          Age                        -0.0182              -0.0678                   0.0167
                                                    (0.0749)             (0.0924)                  (0.0758)

                          Understanding              0.354∗               0.131                     0.413∗
                                                    (0.198)              (0.242)                   (0.220)

                          _cons                      2.073                6.552∗                    -0.111
                                                    (2.551)              (3.431)                   (2.685)
                          N                          3760                 2400                       2560
                          R2                         0.247                0.215                      0.275
                          Standard errors in parentheses
                          * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                  208


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.E.4 – Individual contributions to the group account without the interaction variable in Monetary
sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation, random effects).

                                         (1)        (2)            (3)                   (4)
                                       All data   All data    Removal + Bsl      Introduction + Bsl
                   Framing              6.074∗ ∗ ∗ 5.136∗ ∗ ∗     3.596∗∗               4.908∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (1.159)    (1.180)        (1.566)               (1.348)

                   Material sanction    11.23∗ ∗ ∗ 11.30∗ ∗ ∗      7.422∗ ∗ ∗          14.53∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (0.433)    (0.433)         (0.757)             (0.719)

                   Period               -0.313∗ ∗ ∗ -0.313∗ ∗ ∗    -0.503∗ ∗ ∗         -0.485∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (0.0307)    (0.0307)       (0.0474)            (0.0461)

                   SVO_score                        13.36∗ ∗ ∗     13.53∗ ∗ ∗          17.83∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (2.944)        (3.917)             (3.325)

                   Gender                           0.838          0.416               1.890
                                                   (1.100)        (1.498)             (1.194)

                   Age                             -0.0405        -0.0973             -0.0186
                                                   (0.154)        (0.206)             (0.183)

                   Understanding                    0.655∗         0.229               0.746∗
                                                   (0.381)        (0.504)             (0.450)

                   _cons                4.313∗ ∗ ∗ -4.928          1.846               -7.424
                                       (0.863)     (4.503)        (6.110)             (5.380)
                   sigma_u
                   _cons                7.533∗ ∗ ∗ 7.047∗ ∗ ∗      7.719∗ ∗ ∗          6.158∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (0.451)    (0.427)         (0.579)             (0.466)
                   sigma_e
                   _cons                9.651∗ ∗ ∗ 9.651∗ ∗ ∗      9.425∗ ∗ ∗          9.389∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (0.179)    (0.179)         (0.222)             (0.207)
                   N                    3760       3760            2400                2560
                   adj. R2
                   Standard errors in parentheses
                   * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                         209


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.E.2     Average contribution over time by group for monetary sanctions expe-
          riment

                                                                                   Negative Framing, 141                       Negative Framing, 142                       Negative Framing, 143                    Negative Framing, 144


                                                                0 20 40 60
                 Contribution by group Baseline treatment



                                                                                   Negative Framing, 161                       Negative Framing, 162                       Negative Framing, 163                    Negative Framing, 164
                                                                0 20 40 60




                                                                                   Positive Framing, 151                       Positive Framing, 152                       Positive Framing, 153                    Positive Framing, 154
                                                                0 20 40 60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0       5          10        15    20

                                                                                   Positive Framing, 171                       Positive Framing, 172                       Positive Framing, 173
                                                                0 20 40 60




                                                                              0          5        10     15       20       0        5        10   15         20        0        5    10         15        20

                                                                                                                                             Periods from 1 to 20
                                                                Graphs by Framing and NUM_Groupe



                                                        Figure 4.E.1 – Average contribution over time by group (Baseline).




                                                                                  Negative Framing, 11            Negative Framing, 12                Negative Framing, 13               Negative Framing, 14               Negative Framing, 15
                                                                20 40 60 80
                 Contribution by group Introduction condition
                                                                0




                                                                                  Negative Framing, 31            Negative Framing, 32                Negative Framing, 33               Negative Framing, 34               Positive Framing, 21
                                                                20 40 60 80
                                                                0




                                                                                  Positive Framing, 22            Positive Framing, 23                Positive Framing, 24               Positive Framing, 25               Positive Framing, 41
                                                                20 40 60 80
                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                  0      5        10       15   20   0      5        10    15   20     0       5        10    15   20

                                                                                  Positive Framing, 42            Positive Framing, 43
                                                                20 40 60 80
                                                                0




                                                                              0      5       10    15    20   0        5       10       15   20

                                                                                                                                             Periods from 1 to 20
                                                                Graphs by Framing and NUM_Groupe



Figure 4.E.2 – Average contribution over time by group for monetary sanctions experiment (Introduction
condition).




                                                                                                                                                        210


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                                                              Negative Framing, 111            Negative Framing, 112            Negative Framing, 113            Negative Framing, 114




                                                          0 20 40 60 80
                Contribution by group Removal condition
                                                                              Negative Framing, 191            Negative Framing, 192            Negative Framing, 193            Negative Framing, 194


                                                          0 20 40 60 80




                                                                              Positive Framing, 101            Positive Framing, 102            Positive Framing, 103            Positive Framing, 104
                                                          0 20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                                                                             0       5    10    15       20

                                                                              Positive Framing, 181            Positive Framing, 182            Positive Framing, 183
                                                          0 20 40 60 80




                                                                          0       5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20   0       5    10    15       20

                                                                                                                       Periods from 1 to 20
                                                          Graphs by Framing and NUM_Groupe



  Figure 4.E.3 – Average contribution over time by group for monetary experiment (Removal condition).




4.F     Diff and Diff analysis for monetary sanctions experiment

    Mat_sanc_Seq1 and Mat_sanc_Seq2 are dummy variables which are equal to 1 to distin-
guish treatments where monetary sanction are introduced ; whenever respectiveley in sequence
1 (Mat_sanc_Seq1) or 2 (Mat_sanc_Seq2).




                                                                                                                                   211


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.F.1 – DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 1 in the positive frame (panel
tobit estimation, random effects).

                                                            (1)          (2)
                                                            pbl          pbl
                                Mat_sanc_Seq1       1.734          4.590∗
                                                                   (2.656)
                                                    (2.519)
                                     Sequence       -2.537∗ ∗ ∗    -2.530∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (0.878)
                                                    (0.878)
                               Material sanctions   8.666∗ ∗ ∗     8.676∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (1.264)
                                                    (1.264)
                                     SVO_score                     11.19
                                                                   (6.829)

                                      Gender                       2.286
                                                                   (2.520)

                                       Age                         -0.531
                                                                   (0.421)

                                Understanding                      1.197
                                                                   (0.762)

                                       _cons        6.296∗ ∗ ∗     2.882
                                                    (1.774)        (12.16)
                                      sigma_u
                                        _cons       8.778∗ ∗ ∗     8.085∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.943)        (0.877)
                                      sigma_e
                                       _cons        9.433∗ ∗ ∗     9.434∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.321)        (0.321)
                                        N           1120           1120
                               Standard errors in parentheses
                               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        212


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.F.2 – DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 1 in the negative frame (panel
tobit estimation, random effects).

                                                             (1)         (2)
                                                             pbl         pbl
                                Mat_sanc_Seq1       -0.274         0.0382
                                                                   (2.014)
                                                    (2.112)
                                     Sequence       -3.788∗ ∗ ∗    -3.794∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (0.887)
                                                    (0.886)
                               Material sanctions   9.626∗ ∗ ∗     9.619∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (1.265)
                                                    (1.264)
                                     SVO_score                     14.65∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (4.993)

                                      Gender                       0.683
                                                                   (1.920)

                                       Age                         0.0308
                                                                   (0.228)

                                Understanding                      -0.275
                                                                   (0.703)

                                       _cons        3.849∗ ∗ ∗     -3.122
                                                    (1.484)        (6.910)
                                      sigma_u
                                        _cons       7.587∗ ∗ ∗     6.957∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.792)        (0.736)
                                      sigma_e
                                       _cons        9.900∗ ∗ ∗     9.904∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.322)        (0.323)
                                        N           1280           1280
                               Standard errors in parentheses
                               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        213


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.F.3 – DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 2 in the positive frame (panel
tobit estimation, random effects).

                                                            (1)          (2)
                                                            pbl          pbl
                                Mat_sanc_Seq2       2.506          3.401∗
                                                                   (1.798)
                                                    (1.994)
                                     Sequence       -2.514∗ ∗ ∗    -2.509∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (0.870)
                                                    (0.870)
                               Material sanctions   17.51∗ ∗ ∗     17.50∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (1.260)
                                                    (1.261)
                                     SVO_score                     19.62∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (5.142)

                                      Gender                       4.331∗∗
                                                                   (1.838)

                                       Age                         -0.197
                                                                   (0.293)

                                Understanding                      0.821
                                                                   (0.559)

                                       _cons        6.403∗ ∗ ∗     -7.316
                                                    (1.460)        (8.489)
                                      sigma_u
                                        _cons       6.997∗ ∗ ∗     5.994∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.756)        (0.670)
                                      sigma_e
                                       _cons        9.384∗ ∗ ∗     9.384∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.309)        (0.309)
                                        N           1200           1200
                               Standard errors in parentheses
                               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        214


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.F.4 – DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 2 in the negative frame (panel
tobit estimation, random effects).

                                                             (1)         (2)
                                                             pbl         pbl
                                Mat_sanc_Seq2       -0.723         0.705
                                                                   (1.690)
                                                    (1.781)
                                     Sequence       -3.699∗ ∗ ∗    -3.706∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (0.844)
                                                    (0.844)
                               Material sanctions   9.139∗ ∗ ∗     9.131∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (1.139)
                                                    (1.139)
                                     SVO_score                     17.50∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                   (4.458)

                                      Gender                       0.516
                                                                   (1.568)

                                       Age                         -0.00214
                                                                   (0.225)

                                Understanding                      0.590
                                                                   (0.713)

                                       _cons        4.033∗ ∗ ∗     -8.231
                                                    (1.302)        (7.117)
                                      sigma_u
                                        _cons       6.537∗ ∗ ∗     5.793∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.673)        (0.612)
                                      sigma_e
                                       _cons        9.461∗ ∗ ∗     9.460∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.281)        (0.281)
                                        N           1360           1360
                               Standard errors in parentheses
                               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        215


                Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.G          Number of monetary sanctions sent by sequence

4.G.1        Probit analysis of the number of monetary sanctions sent

Table 4.G.1 – Subject i’s propensity to send monetary sanctions to subject j with demographics variables
(probit analysis with cluster by suject).

                                                          (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)               (6)
                                                       All data    All data       Removal    Removal     Introduction      Introduction
  Framing                                               -0.130      -0.223         -0.370∗    -0.383∗        0.171            0.0363
                                                       (0.148)     (0.146)        (0.224)    (0.217)        (0.251)           (0.263)

  (absolute) Negative Deviation yj − yi < 0             0.0939∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0658∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0899∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0502∗∗          0.111∗ ∗ ∗      0.0893∗ ∗ ∗
                                                       (0.0134)    (0.0155)    (0.0160)    (0.0199)         (0.0197)         (0.0226)

  Positive Deviation yj − yi > 0                       -0.00460     0.0322∗∗      0.00254     0.0481∗∗       -0.0161          0.0116
                                                       (0.0113)    (0.0164)       (0.0159)   (0.0239)       (0.0158)         (0.0227)

  Own contribution                                      -0.0153∗   0.00915        -0.0175∗    0.0171         -0.0268∗        -0.00722
                                                       (0.00878)   (0.0112)      (0.00920)   (0.0141)       (0.0137)         (0.0169)

  Period                                                -0.0679∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0617∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0834∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0740∗ ∗ ∗ -0.0534∗ ∗ ∗      -0.0489∗∗
                                                       (0.0144)     (0.0151)     (0.0202)     (0.0209)      (0.0201)         (0.0211)

  Sequence                                               0.825∗ ∗ ∗ 0.792∗ ∗ ∗
                                                        (0.190)     (0.198)

  Age                                                  0.00157     0.00322        -0.00271    0.0113        0.00299          -0.00235
                                                       (0.0196)    (0.0197)       (0.0208)   (0.0208)       (0.0301)         (0.0316)

  Gender                                                -0.0243     -0.0181        -0.135     -0.136        0.00120          0.0287
                                                        (0.142)     (0.143)       (0.222)    (0.221)        (0.190)          (0.189)

  SVO_score                                              -0.227      -0.114       -0.00263    0.143          -0.559           -0.440
                                                        (0.366)     (0.357)        (0.501)   (0.500)        (0.508)          (0.494)

  Understanding                                         -0.0106     -0.0194        -0.0381    -0.0538       0.00384          0.00583
                                                       (0.0567)    (0.0559)       (0.0752)   (0.0765)       (0.0894)         (0.0891)

  Positive deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j > 0                -0.0310∗∗                 -0.0345                         -0.0202
                                                                   (0.0151)                  (0.0225)                        (0.0195)

  Negative deviation from others two yj − ȳ−i−j < 0                0.0556∗ ∗ ∗               0.0689∗ ∗ ∗                     0.0430∗∗
                                                                   (0.0123)                  (0.0171)                        (0.0171)

  _cons                                                  -0.583      -1.029∗∗      -0.197     -1.098∗       0.0362            -0.236
                                                        (0.512)     (0.512)       (0.589)    (0.589)        (0.895)          (0.926)
  N                                                       3840        3840          1800       1800          2040              2040
  Standard errors in parentheses
                                                * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                              216


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.H      Number of monetary sanctions received by sequence

4.H.1     Removal condition for monetary sanctions experiment

                                                                              7   2




                                 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                                                                      23




                                 Percentage punished by deviation level                              71
                                                                                               23         59
                                                                                                                                          41
                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                    112

                                                                                                                                    82

                                                                                                                          125
                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                   0




                                                                          [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]                        (14,20]
                                                                                            Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                                Negative Framing                          Positive Framing




Figure 4.H.1 – Likelihood of receiving monetary sanctions by deviation level (with number of observations in
Removal condition).
                                                   2.5
                                 Number of sanction received
                                    1         1.5  .5     2




                                                                          0                2                   4                6                         8              10
                                                                                                                    Period
                                                                                                      Positive Framing                   Negative Framing




       Figure 4.H.2 – Evolution of the number of monetary sanctions received (Removal condition).
                                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                    Average punishment points received




                                                                                  2




                                                                              7




                                                                                      23



                                                                                                     71                                   41
                                                                                               23         59                                         20 20          5
                                                                                                                    112             82
                                                                                                                          125                                           10

                                                                          [-20,-14)   [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]                        (14,20]
                                                                                            Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                                Negative Framing                          Positive Framing




Figure 4.H.3 – Average number of monetary sanctions received from deviation level (with numbers of obser-
vations in Removal condition).



                                                                                                               217


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.H.2      Introduction condition for monetary sanctions experiment

                                                                             6   6




                               10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                               Percentage punished by deviation level
                                                                                     29     9


                                                                                                          24




                                                                                                     88

                                                                                                                                                  29
                                                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                                                                 51
                                                                                                                          236
                                                                                                                    143                                  12
                                                                                                                                       32



                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                 0



                                                                        [-20,-14)    [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]                    (14,20]
                                                                                           Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                                Negative Framing                       Positive Framing




Figure 4.H.4 – Likelihood of receiving monetary sanctions by deviation level (with number of observations in
Introduction condition).
                                                 2.5      2
                                Number of sanction received
                               .5      1        1.5
                                                 0




                                                                        10             12                   14                  16                  18                 20
                                                                                                                    Period
                                                                                                      Positive Framing                Negative Framing




     Figure 4.H.5 – Evolution of the number of monetary sanctions received (Introduction condition).
                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                  Average punishment points received




                                                                             6   6


                                                                                            9

                                                                                     29

                                                                                                          24
                                                                                                     88
                                                                                                                                                  29 12
                                                                                                                    143 236      51 32                        14
                                                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                        [-20,-14)    [-14,-8)     [-8,-2)    [-2,2]     (2,8]       (8,14]                    (14,20]
                                                                                           Deviation from peer's average contribution

                                                                                                Negative Framing                       Positive Framing




Figure 4.H.6 – Average number of monetary sanctions received from deviation level (with observations numbers
in Introduction condition).




                                                                                                               218


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.H.3      Tobit analysis of the number of monetary sanctions received

Table 4.H.1 – Number of monetary sanction received without interaction variables (panel tobit estimation
two sided, random effects).

                                                     (1)                (2)                    (3)
                                                  All data       Removal condition   Introduction condition
              Framing                              -0.354             -1.687∗∗               1.114
                                                  (0.535)            (0.809)                (0.784)

              Positive Deviation yi − ȳ−i > 0     0.0320             0.0607                0.00720
                                                  (0.0380)           (0.0637)               (0.0460)

              Negative Deviation yi − ȳ−i ≤ 0      0.587∗ ∗ ∗         0.588∗ ∗ ∗            0.613∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.0346)           (0.0528)               (0.0471)

              Others average contribution          -0.0647∗           -0.0963∗               -0.0805∗
                                                  (0.0332)           (0.0536)               (0.0450)

              Period                               -0.267∗ ∗ ∗        -0.340∗ ∗ ∗            -0.205∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.0388)           (0.0648)               (0.0488)

              Sequence                              3.036∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.615)

              SVO_score                             1.603              1.125                 1.394
                                                   (1.303)            (1.982)               (1.753)

              Age                                  -0.0716            -0.0931                -0.0838
                                                  (0.0634)           (0.0922)               (0.0895)

              Gender                                -0.279             -0.533                -0.373
                                                   (0.491)            (0.808)               (0.620)

              Understanding                        0.0942              0.219                 -0.122
                                                   (0.165)            (0.245)               (0.230)

              _cons                                -0.0265             1.116                 3.462
                                                   (1.880)            (2.946)               (2.676)
              sigma_u
              _cons                                 2.341∗ ∗ ∗         2.481∗ ∗ ∗            2.149∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.216)            (0.347)               (0.262)
              sigma_e
              _cons                                 2.887∗ ∗ ∗         3.231∗ ∗ ∗            2.589∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.111)            (0.192)               (0.130)
              N                                     1280                600                   680
              Standard errors in parentheses
                                            * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                             219


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.H.2 – Number of monetary sanction received with interaction variables and demographics variables
(panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).

                                                     (1)                (2)                    (3)
                                                  All data       Removal condition   Introduction condition
              Framing                              -1.731∗            -1.993∗                -0.231
                                                  (0.895)            (1.182)                (1.757)

              Positive Deviation yi − ȳ−i > 0    0.00642             -0.0401                0.0367
                                                  (0.0437)           (0.0792)               (0.0500)

              Negative Deviation yi − ȳ−i ≤ 0      0.579∗ ∗ ∗         0.576∗ ∗ ∗            0.608∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.0426)           (0.0624)               (0.0608)

              Others average contribution          -0.0767∗∗          -0.0820                -0.118∗∗
                                                  (0.0355)           (0.0541)               (0.0507)

              Period                               -0.318∗ ∗ ∗        -0.318∗ ∗ ∗            -0.264∗ ∗ ∗
                                                  (0.0478)           (0.0846)               (0.0640)

              Sequence                              3.026∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.612)

              Period × Framing                     0.122∗             -0.0682                0.118
                                                  (0.0636)            (0.128)               (0.101)

              Positive Deviation × Framing         0.0775              0.285∗∗               -0.189∗
                                                  (0.0790)            (0.121)               (0.115)

              Negative Deviation × Framing         0.0270             0.0184                 0.0375
                                                  (0.0690)            (0.109)               (0.0925)

              SVO_score                             1.453              1.306                 1.403
                                                   (1.300)            (2.002)               (1.779)

              Age                                  -0.0815            -0.101                 -0.0820
                                                  (0.0632)           (0.0934)               (0.0907)

              Gender                                -0.318             -0.362                -0.435
                                                   (0.490)            (0.820)               (0.629)

              Understanding                        0.0726              0.184                -0.0988
                                                   (0.165)            (0.248)               (0.234)

              _cons                                 1.136              1.312                 4.490
                                                   (1.968)            (3.025)               (2.793)
              sigma_u
              _cons                                 2.322∗ ∗ ∗         2.518∗ ∗ ∗            2.184∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.214)            (0.356)               (0.266)
              sigma_e
              _cons                                 2.880∗ ∗ ∗         3.182∗ ∗ ∗            2.576∗ ∗ ∗
                                                   (0.111)            (0.189)               (0.130)
              N                                     1280                600                   680
              Standard errors in parentheses
                                            * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                             220


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.I      Contribution change for monetary sanctions experiment

Table 4.I.1 – Panel regressions of individuals contributions change in Monetary sanction experiment, with
demographics variables (random effects with clusters by group.

                                                             (1)             (2)                       (3)
                                                           All data    Removal condition     Introduction condition
   Framing                                                  1.213∗ ∗ ∗      1.286∗ ∗ ∗               0.991
                                                           (0.351)         (0.392)                  (0.692)

   Monetary sanctions received in t − 1                      0.430∗ ∗ ∗        0.495∗∗               0.382∗
                                                            (0.149)           (0.211)               (0.204)

   Peers’average in t − 1                                   -0.118∗ ∗ ∗        -0.122∗∗              -0.114∗∗
                                                           (0.0343)           (0.0560)              (0.0538)

   Positive Deviation in t − 1                              -0.544∗ ∗ ∗        -0.568∗ ∗ ∗           -0.523∗ ∗ ∗
                                                           (0.0943)           (0.171)               (0.0956)

   Negative Deviation in t − 1                               0.284∗ ∗ ∗        0.289∗∗               0.263∗
                                                           (0.0996)           (0.132)               (0.154)

   Period                                                   -0.116∗            -0.164                -0.0676
                                                           (0.0699)           (0.104)               (0.0930)

   Sequence                                                  1.332∗
                                                            (0.803)

   Monetary sanctions received in period t − 1 × Framing     -0.255            -0.502∗∗             0.00492
                                                            (0.186)           (0.243)               (0.272)

   SVO_score                                                 1.744∗            1.555                 1.961
                                                            (0.949)           (1.242)               (1.556)

   Age                                                      0.0396             0.0617              0.000327
                                                           (0.0469)           (0.0738)             (0.0430)

   Gender                                                    0.142            -0.0722                0.321
                                                            (0.314)           (0.478)               (0.427)

   Understanding                                             0.123             0.130                 0.153
                                                            (0.121)           (0.198)               (0.137)

   _cons                                                     -0.685            -0.687                0.403
                                                            (1.705)           (2.647)               (2.739)
   N                                                          1152              540                   612
   R2                                                        0.284             0.275                 0.303
   Standard errors in parentheses
                                          * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                        221


               Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.I.2 – Contribution change (t) by contributor type in Monetary sanction experiment, without demo-
graphics variables (panel analysis random effects with clusters by group).

                                                      High_Contributors (xt−1
                                                                          i   − xt−1
                                                                                  −i > 0)                                                Low_Contributors (xt−1
                                                                                                                                                             i  − xt−1
                                                                                                                                                                    −i ≤ 0)
                                                      All data Removal      Introduction                                                 All data   Removal    Introduction
  Framing                                              1.763∗∗   1.277          2.010∗                                                    1.272∗ ∗ ∗ 0.589         2.105∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (0.828)   (1.231)        (1.114)                                                   (0.419)     (0.590)      (0.802)

  Monetary sanctions received in t − 1                -0.0401                 0.0683                         -0.176                       0.542∗ ∗ ∗ 0.444∗∗         0.649∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (0.122)                 (0.188)                       (0.157)                      (0.123)     (0.188)        (0.180)

  Peers’average in t − 1                               -0.181∗ ∗ ∗ -0.281∗∗                                  -0.104                       -0.177∗ ∗ ∗ -0.139∗∗       -0.248∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (0.0695)     (0.115)                                  (0.0884)                     (0.0338)    (0.0580)       (0.0545)

  Deviation from peer average in t − 1                 -0.772∗ ∗ ∗ -1.002∗ ∗ ∗                               -0.593∗ ∗ ∗                  -0.288∗ ∗ ∗ -0.313∗ ∗ ∗    -0.215
                                                      (0.101)      (0.164)                                  (0.0944)                     (0.0997)     (0.121)       (0.157)

  Period                                               -0.269∗∗                -0.284                        -0.245                       0.0228      -0.110        0.0990
                                                      (0.129)                 (0.187)                       (0.167)                      (0.0388)    (0.101)        (0.113)

  Sequence                                             2.504
                                                      (1.591)

  _cons                                                3.756∗ ∗ ∗ 6.190∗ ∗ ∗                                 4.291                        1.507∗      2.070          0.972
                                                      (1.360)     (2.328)                                   (2.915)                      (0.877)     (1.290)        (2.165)
  N                                                     451         224                                       227                          701         316            385
  R2                                                   0.190       0.184                                     0.209                        0.197       0.189          0.221
  Standard errors in parentheses
  * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01)




4.J        Emergence of a common contribution standard for monetary
           sanctions experiment

                                                           Positive framing                                    Negative framing
                                       50




                                                                                             50
                                       45




                                                                                             45
                                       40




                                                                                             40
                                       35




                                                                                             35
                                           30




                                                                                                 30
                                   Percent




                                                                                         Percent
                                    25




                                                                                          25
                                       20




                                                                                             20
                                       15




                                                                                             15
                                       10




                                                                                             10
                                       5




                                                                                             5
                                       0




                                                                                             0




                                                -20     -10         0          10   20                -20    -10         0          10    20
                                                           Public contribution                                  Public contribution




Figure 4.J.1 – Percentage of deviation from peers contributions by framing in Monetary sanction experiment




4.J.1       Full contributors for monetary sanctions experiment

    The dependent variable is a dummy variable representing full contribution.




                                                                                    222


           Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.J.1 – Full contribution depending on frame in Monetary sanction experiment (probit regression).

                             (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)              (6)
                           All data     All data      No Sanctions     Sanctions     Removal       Introduction
          full_contri
          Framing           0.544∗ ∗ ∗ 0.430∗∗           0.265          0.659∗∗       0.281           0.746∗ ∗ ∗
                            (2.80)     (2.26)            (1.37)         (2.26)        (0.68)          (3.34)

          Sanctions         0.831∗ ∗ ∗ 0.863∗ ∗ ∗                                     0.592∗ ∗ ∗      0.998∗ ∗ ∗
                            (5.56)     (5.75)                                         (3.01)          (4.32)

          Period           -0.0237∗      -0.0235∗       -0.0870∗ ∗ ∗    0.0565∗∗     -0.00504        -0.00859
                           (-1.85)       (-1.81)        (-6.04)         (2.20)        (-0.26)         (-0.39)

          Sequence          0.313∗∗      0.305∗∗         0.912∗ ∗ ∗     -0.473
                            (2.19)       (2.14)          (4.71)         (-1.24)

          SVO_score                      0.222           0.515          -0.206       -0.618           0.235
                                         (0.64)          (1.17)         (-0.43)      (-1.13)          (0.39)

          Gender                         0.0602          0.137          -0.0113      0.0128         0.000404
                                         (0.59)          (0.99)         (-0.07)      (0.09)          (0.00)

          Age                            0.0182          0.0219         0.0194       -0.00767        0.0381∗
                                         (1.31)          (1.36)         (0.92)        (-0.34)        (1.88)

          Understanding                  0.116∗ ∗ ∗      0.0590         0.192∗ ∗ ∗    0.130∗          0.124∗ ∗ ∗
                                         (2.81)          (1.24)         (3.36)        (1.88)          (2.69)

          _cons             -1.391∗ ∗ ∗ -2.569∗ ∗ ∗     -2.068∗ ∗ ∗     -2.511∗ ∗ ∗ -1.435∗          -3.263∗ ∗ ∗
                            (-8.13)     (-5.02)         (-3.34)         (-3.78)     (-1.72)          (-5.47)
          N                  3760        3760            2480            1280        1200             1360
          t statistics in parentheses
                                        * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                         223


              Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.J.2 – Probit to get full contributors depending on the frame in Monetary sanction experiment, with
interaction variable.

                                                            (1)         (2)               (3)
                                                          All data    Removal        Introduction
                               full_contri
                               Framing                      0.179      0.316            0.199
                                                            (0.91)     (0.58)           (1.18)

                               Sanctions                    0.569∗ ∗ ∗ 0.623∗ ∗ ∗       0.462
                                                            (3.01)     (3.08)           (1.52)

                               Period                     -0.0233∗    -0.00501         -0.00682
                                                          (-1.78)      (-0.25)          (-0.31)

                               Sequence                     0.297∗∗
                                                            (2.04)

                               Sanctions × Framing          0.551∗    -0.0587           0.892∗∗
                                                            (1.84)    (-0.13)           (2.00)

                               SVO_score                    0.215     -0.619            0.230
                                                            (0.62)    (-1.13)           (0.38)

                               Gender                     0.0721       0.0125          -0.00700
                                                          (0.71)       (0.08)           (-0.04)

                               Age                        0.0176      -0.00766         0.0378∗
                                                          (1.30)       (-0.34)         (1.90)

                               Understanding                0.119∗ ∗ ∗ 0.130∗           0.131∗ ∗ ∗
                                                            (2.82)     (1.88)           (2.65)

                               _cons                      -2.434∗ ∗ ∗ -1.453∗          -2.969∗ ∗ ∗
                                                          (-4.95)     (-1.70)          (-5.32)
                               N                           3760        1200             1360
                               t statistics in parentheses
                                           * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




4.J.2     Full contributors for monetary sanctions experiment

Table 4.J.3 – Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 1 of Monetary sanction experiment.
         Treatment Framing : period          1       2         3      4         5       6         7      8      9      10
      Baseline treatment        Negative     25      15.6      9.4    9.4       3.1     6.3       9.4    3.1    6.3    6.3
                                Positive     32.1    21.4      10.7   14.3      10.7    3.6       3.6    14.3   0      7.1
      Introduction condition    Negative     19.4    19.4      16.7   8.3       5.6     2.8       2.8    8.3    0      2.8
                                Positive     31.3    25        21.9   21.9      15.6    18.8      6.3    9.4    15.6   6.3
      Removal condition         Negative     34.4    21.9      25     31.3      21.9    15.6      37.5   31.3   21.9   21.9
                                Positive     17.9    25        21.4   25        46.4    57.1      57.1   46.4   46.4   46.4




Table 4.J.4 – Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 2 of Monetary sanction experiment.
         Treatment Framing : period          11      12        13     14        15      16        17     18     19     20
      Baseline treatment        Negative     12.5    12.5      6.3    9.4       9.4     6.3       3.1    3.1    12.5   6.3
                                Positive     17.9    14.3      7.1    10.7      17.9    10.7      10.7   7.1    7.1    10.7
      Introduction condition    Negative     22.2    16.7      16.7   19.4      13.9    13.9      19.4   13.9   11.1   19.4
                                Positive     34.4    40.6      53.1   56.3      62.5    68.8      68.8   75     78.1   84.4
      Removal condition         Negative     18.9    21.9      6.3    6.3       9.4     3.1       6.3    9.4    12.5   3.1
                                Positive     28.6    28.6      21.4   25        17.9    17.9      14.3   14.3   14.3   7.1




                                                              224


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




4.J.3    Free riders for monetary sanctions experiment

   Table 4.J.5 – Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 1 of Monetary sanction experiment.
        Treatment Framing : period       1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10
     Baseline treatment       Negative   21.9   21.9   28.1   37.5   31.3   40.6   50     40.6   40.6   50
                              Positive   10.7   21.4   10.7   21.4   21.4   35.7   50     35.7   35.7   46.4
     Introduction condition   Negative   25     16.7   30.6   33.3   41.7   50     47.2   41.7   55.6   47.2
                              Positive   9.4    12.5   15.6   25     18.8   15.6   28.1   37.5   34.4   56.3
     Removal condition        Negative   9.4    6.3    12.5   6.3    18.8   3.1    12.5   18.8   18.8   28.1
                              Positive   3.6    10.7   7.1    10.7   3.6    7.1    10.7   10.7   21.4   21.4




   Table 4.J.6 – Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 2 of Monetary sanction experiment.
        Treatment Framing : period       11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19     20
     Baseline treatment       Negative   37.5   34.4   43.8   46.9   53.1   40.6   46.9   56.3   56.3   75
                              Positive   28.6   32.1   28.6   35.7   32.1   35.7   39.3   42.9   42.9   60.7
     Introduction condition   Negative   22.2   13.9   19.4   13.9   13.9   11.1   19.4   22.2   25     22.2
                              Positive   3.1    6.3    6.3    9.4    0      0      3.1    3.1    0      0
     Removal condition        Negative   46.9   37.5   46.9   56.3   65.6   46.9   53.1   56.3   62.5   68.8
                              Positive   7.1    14.3   17.9   32.1   39.3   46.4   50     57.1   57.1   64.3




4.J.4    Analysis of the spread of individual contributions for monetary sanc-
         tions experiment

    In order to better analyze how framing and the availability of sanctions impact the spread of
individual contributions, we replicate the figure presented in Ramalingam et al. (2019).

    The figures below use boxplot to present the spread of contributions of each individual within
a particular treatment. It enables us to get an idea of the ease with which subjects define a fixed
rate of contribution. Once again, it seems that in sequence 2 of the Introduction condition the
spread of contributions by subject is lower in the positive frame than in the negative frame.
This means that subjects have less difficulty in defining behavior which can be considered as a
common standard of contribution and so as a norm of contribution.




                                                       225


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                                Positive Sanction Removal(seq 1)                                 Positive Sanction Removal(seq 2)




                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                   0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                     Contribution (tokens)




                                                                                      Contribution (tokens)
                                                Negative Sanction Removal(seq 1)                                 Negative Sanction Removal(seq 2)
                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                   0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                     Contribution (tokens)




                                                                                      Contribution (tokens)



 Figure 4.J.2 – Spread of individual contributions in Monetary sanction experiment (Removal condition)

Each boxplot represents the dispersion of a subject’s contributions (defining quartiles). The red
point corresponds to the average extraction. The blue points represent isolated observations. The
order of presentation of the subjects is random.




                                        Positive Sanction Introduction (seq 1)                              Positive Sanction Introduction(seq 2)
                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                   0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                     Contribution (tokens)




                                                                                      Contribution (tokens)




                                  Negative Sanction Introduction (seq 1)                           Negative Sanction Introduction (seq 2)
                  0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                   0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                     Contribution (tokens)




                                                                                      Contribution (tokens)




Figure 4.J.3 – Spread of individual contributions in Monetary sanction experiment (Introduction condition)

Each boxplot represents the dispersion of a subject’s contributions (defining quartiles). The red
point corresponds to the average extraction. The blue points represent isolated observations. The
order of presentation of the subjects is random.




                                                                               226


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                               Positive Baseline treatment (seq 1)                                 Positive Baseline treatment (seq 2)




                 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                     0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                    Contribution (tokens)




                                                                                        Contribution (tokens)
                                               Negative Baseline treatment (seq 1)                                 Negative Baseline treatment (seq 2)
                 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20




                                                                                     0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
                    Contribution (tokens)




                                                                                        Contribution (tokens)



 Figure 4.J.4 – Spread of individual contributions in Monetary sanction experiment (Baseline treatment)

Each boxplot represents the dispersion of a subject’s contributions (defining quartiles). The red
point corresponds to the average extraction. The blue points represent isolated observations. The
order of presentation of the subjects is random.




4.J.5   Gini analysis for monetary sanctions experiment

   The Gini index was calculated using the formula :

                                                                           Pn Pn
                                                                              i=1     j=1 |xi − xj |
                                                                Gini =
                                                                                      × nk=1 xk
                                                                                        P
                                                                             2×n




                                                                                227


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                         1
                         .9
                         .8
                         .7
                     .4 .5 .6
                     Gini Index
                         .3
                         .2
                         .1
                         0




                                  0       5                         10                    15                      20
                                                                   Period
                                      Positive framing Baseline             Positive framing Monetary Sanction

                                      Negative framing Baseline             Negative framing Monetary Sanction




Figure 4.J.5 – Evolution of the Gini index in the Introduction condition in Monetary sanction experiment.
                         1
                         .9
                         .8
                         .7
                     .4 .5 .6
                     Gini Index
                         .3
                         .2
                         .1
                         0




                                  0       5                         10                    15                      20
                                                                   Period
                                      Positive framing Monetary Sanction              Positive framing Baseline

                                      Negative framing Monetary Sanction              Negative framing Baseline




 Figure 4.J.6 – Evolution of the Gini index in the Removal condition in Monetary sanction experiment.




                                                                  228


           Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                          1
                          .9
                          .8
                          .7
                     .4 .5 .6
                      Gini Index
                          .3
                          .2
                          .1
                          0




                                   0           5                       10                   15                     20
                                                                      Period
                                               Positive framing Baseline           Negative framing Baseline




                 Figure 4.J.7 – Evolution of the Gini index in the Baseline treatment.



   Table 4.J.7 – Gini index by period, by treatment in Monetary sanction experiment


   Treatment Framing : period          1           2           3           4       5              6            7        8       9       10
Baseline treatment      Negative       0.370       0.393       0.365       0.500   0.475          0.537        0.609    0.566   0.575   0.607
                        Positive       0.271       0.352       0.285       0.358   0.340          0.417        0.476    0.497   0.452   0.559
Introduction condition Negative        0.372       0.409       0.441       0.510   0.557          0.598        0.531    0.546   0.576   0.591
                        Positive       0.262       0.237       0.316       0.380   0.300          0.344        0.406    0.398   0.462   0.643
Removal condition       Negative       0.272       0.213       0.265       0.170   0.286          0.178        0.215    0.281   0.244   0.316
                        Positive       0.200       0.234       0.203       0.225   0.134          0.179        0.202    0.189   0.160   0.286




   Treatment Framing : period          11          12          13          14      15             16           17       18      19      20
Baseline treatment      Negative       0.507       0.503       0.543       0.566   0.621          0.548        0.574    0.642   0.665   0.703
                        Positive       0.410       0.430       0.380       0.444   0.489          0.522        0.495    0.512   0.524   0.615
Introduction condition Negative        0.382       0.339       0.243       0.325   0.316          0.301        0.335    0.217   0.149   0.355
                        Positive       0.194       0.127       0.125       0.135   0.069          0.028        0.049    0.051   0.022   0.025
Removal condition       Negative       0.448       0.474       0.538       0.616   0.573          0.569        0.532    0.651   0.642   0.704
                        Positive       0.190       0.265       0.323       0.444   0.463          0.376        0.476    0.464   0.566   0.574




                                                                  229


                Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.J.8 – Gini analysis in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation one obser-
vation per group per period (two sided, random effects))

                               (1)         (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)            (6)
                            All data    All data     Without Sanctions   Sanctions    Removal       Introduction
      Framing                -0.142∗ ∗ ∗ -0.134∗ ∗ ∗      -0.132∗ ∗ ∗      -0.179∗ ∗ ∗ -0.173∗∗        -0.140∗∗
                            (0.0374)    (0.0384)         (0.0376)         (0.0658)     (0.0875)       (0.0605)

      Sanctions              -0.286∗ ∗ ∗ -0.275∗ ∗ ∗                                  -0.198∗ ∗ ∗      -0.252∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.0131)    (0.0177)                                     (0.0461)         (0.0411)

      Period                 0.0144∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0144∗ ∗ ∗     0.0280∗ ∗ ∗      -0.0109∗ ∗ ∗ 0.0149∗ ∗ ∗ 0.00420
                            (0.00189)   (0.00189)       (0.00199)        (0.00301)    (0.00364)    (0.00326)

      Sequence               -0.110∗ ∗ ∗ -0.110∗ ∗ ∗     -0.199∗ ∗ ∗      0.0701
                            (0.0217)    (0.0217)        (0.0249)         (0.0720)

      Sanctions × Framing                -0.0235                                       0.118∗ ∗ ∗      -0.142∗ ∗ ∗
                                        (0.0264)                                     (0.0421)         (0.0377)

      _cons                  0.452∗ ∗ ∗ 0.448∗ ∗ ∗        0.351∗ ∗ ∗      0.352∗ ∗ ∗ 0.350∗ ∗ ∗         0.489∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.0284)   (0.0287)         (0.0288)         (0.0591)    (0.0821)         (0.0451)
      sigma_u
      _cons                  0.122∗ ∗ ∗ 0.122∗ ∗ ∗        0.122∗ ∗ ∗      0.179∗ ∗ ∗ 0.159∗ ∗ ∗         0.113∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.0138)   (0.0138)         (0.0146)         (0.0241)    (0.0310)         (0.0215)
      sigma_e
      _cons                   0.162∗ ∗ ∗ 0.162∗ ∗ ∗       0.138∗ ∗ ∗       0.145∗ ∗ ∗ 0.172∗ ∗ ∗       0.166∗ ∗ ∗
                            (0.00410)   (0.00410)       (0.00419)        (0.00694)   (0.00806)       (0.00716)
      N                        911         911             596              315         284             332
      Standard errors in parentheses
                                       * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




4.K       Payoffs complementary analysis for monetary sanctions ex-
          periment

   Table 4.K.1 presents panel regression on payoffs without the interaction variable Framing ×
Sanction.




                                                       230


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.K.1 – Panel regression of individuals payoffs without the interaction variable in Monetary sanction
experiment (random effects).

                                                      (1)         (2)                (3)
                                                    All data   Removal          Introduction
                               Framing               2.285∗ ∗ ∗ 1.232∗              2.721∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.558)     (0.688)            (0.725)

                               Material sanctions    -0.574∗∗     -1.356∗ ∗ ∗     -0.0291
                                                    (0.227)      (0.389)          (0.380)

                               Period                -0.0457∗ ∗ ∗ -0.111∗ ∗ ∗      -0.0888∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (0.0166)     (0.0245)         (0.0247)

                               SVO_score             -3.756∗ ∗ ∗ -4.401∗∗          -3.505∗∗
                                                    (1.390)      (1.719)          (1.786)

                               Gender               -0.0886       -0.482           -0.349
                                                    (0.520)      (0.659)          (0.642)

                               Age                   0.0167      -0.0597           0.185∗
                                                    (0.0729)    (0.0907)          (0.0991)

                               Understanding         0.513∗ ∗ ∗ 0.496∗∗            0.304
                                                    (0.180)     (0.222)           (0.242)

                               _cons                 21.90∗ ∗ ∗ 25.38∗ ∗ ∗         19.59∗ ∗ ∗
                                                    (2.132)     (2.694)           (2.901)
                               N                     3760        2400              2560
                               R2                    0.066       0.058             0.077
                               Standard errors in parentheses
                               * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




4.L      Others potential effects of the frame for monetary sanctions
         experiment

4.L.1     Judgment complementary analysis for monetary sanctions experiment

    At the end of the experiment, subjects had to describe their perceptions concernning the
effect of others’actions on their own payoff. They could qualify them as generating :"i) important
losses, ii) losses, iii) no gains or losses, iv) gains and v) important gains". These perception score
compose the following variable "QF Perception Effects". In table 4.L.2 we pool the results into
three levels : 1) losses, 2) no gains or losses, 3) gains to generate a perception score "QF Perception
Effects2". Material sanctions applied is a dummy variable that is equal to one when material
sanctions were available during the experiment. Average Peer Contributions (sum) represents
the average sum of contributions from the subject’s peers (other group members).




                                                         231


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



 Table 4.L.1 – Perception of others actions in Monetary sanction experiment (ordered logit analysis).

                                           (1)                     (2)                      (3)
                                   QF_Perception_Effects   QF_Perception_Effects   QF_Perception_Effects
Framing                                   0.359                   0.431                   -0.227
                                         (0.266)                 (0.285)                 (0.318)

Material sanctions applied                 0.791                   0.592                   0.229
                                          (0.560)                 (0.577)                 (0.592)

Treatment order                            -0.199                 -0.0966                  -0.347
                                          (0.315)                 (0.320)                 (0.328)

SVO_score                                                          0.928                   1.129
                                                                  (0.724)                 (0.733)

Gender                                                             -0.673∗∗                -0.736∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                  (0.271)                 (0.277)

Age                                                              -0.00360                0.000272
                                                                 (0.0368)                (0.0379)

Understanding                                                     -0.132                  -0.246∗∗
                                                                 (0.0920)                (0.0980)

Average Peer Contributions (sum)                                                          0.0743∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                         (0.0150)
cut1
_cons                                      -1.081∗ ∗ ∗             -1.841∗                 -1.350
                                          (0.287)                 (1.099)                 (1.121)
cut2
_cons                                      0.410                   -0.300                  0.300
                                          (0.274)                 (1.089)                 (1.115)
cut3
_cons                                      1.099∗ ∗ ∗              0.422                   1.094
                                          (0.284)                 (1.088)                 (1.117)
cut4
_cons                                      3.647∗ ∗ ∗              3.028∗ ∗ ∗              3.941∗ ∗ ∗
                                          (0.442)                 (1.137)                 (1.176)
N                                           188                     188                     188
Standard errors in parentheses
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                    232


               Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Table 4.L.2 – Perception of others actions in Monetary sanction experiment (ordered logit analysis, perception
is reduced to 3 levels).

                                             (1)                        (2)                       (3)
                                    QF_Perception_Effects2     QF_Perception_Effects2   QF_Perception_Effects2
 Framing                                    0.378                      0.458                    -0.157
                                           (0.279)                    (0.308)                  (0.348)

 Material sanctions applied                 0.629                      0.451                   0.00796
                                           (0.592)                    (0.616)                  (0.648)

 Treatment order                           -0.0792                    0.0196                    -0.169
                                           (0.328)                    (0.338)                  (0.355)

 SVO_score                                                             0.721                    0.875
                                                                      (0.788)                  (0.816)

 Gender                                                                -0.821∗ ∗ ∗              -0.946∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                      (0.289)                  (0.302)

 Age                                                                  -0.00480                 -0.00743
                                                                      (0.0406)                 (0.0424)

 Understanding                                                         -0.147                   -0.264∗∗
                                                                      (0.101)                  (0.110)

 Average Peer Contributions (sum)                                                               0.0713∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                               (0.0163)
 cut1
 _cons                                      0.440                      -0.525                   -0.195
                                           (0.295)                    (1.203)                  (1.242)
 cut2
 _cons                                      1.131∗ ∗ ∗                 0.201                    0.607
                                           (0.304)                    (1.202)                  (1.243)
 N                                           188                        188                      188
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




4.L.2      Strategic understanding for monetary sanctions experiment

   To understand the subjects’ level of strategic understanding of the game, we replicate Fos-
gaard et al. (2014) final questionnary at the end of the experiment.

   There are two kinds of questions, representing two kinds of objectives. The first type of
questions asks what their contribution would be in order to maximize their own payoffs (a).
The second type of question asks what their contribution would be in order to maximize the
group earning (b). For both objectives, they were presented with two situations concerning the
contribution of the other members of the group.

    As a result, it seems that subjects do not get the strategic aspect of the game. Indeed, their
behavior seem to be driven by reciprocity. All the subjects in the two frames declare that they
will not contribute to the public good if others do not contribute for both objectives (individual
and group maximization).

    Conversely, under both frames a majority of subjects declare that they will fully contribute
to the public good if other’s are full contributors. These results corroborate the fact that subjects
behave as conditionnal cooperators.



                                                         233


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




   Nevertheless, it seems that the frame also impacts their stated willingness to reciprocate to
others’ contributions. The percentage of subjects who declare that they will fully contribute is
lower in the negative frame.

   The questions specified that they had to answer how much they will contribute to public
good when there were no sanctions that could be delivered :

    a) To maximize individual earning, if others fully contribute :

Figure 4.L.1 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in
Monetary sanction experiment (all data presented in this chapter)


                                                   Positive                                              Negative
                                     100




                                                                                       100
                                     75




                                                                                       75
                            percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
                                    50




                                                                                      50
                                     25




                                                                                       25
                                     0




                                                                                       0




                                                          No contribution                            In between
                                                          Full contribution




Figure 4.L.2 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in
Monetary sanction experiment (Removal condition)


                                                   Positive                                              Negative
                                     100




                                                                                       100
                                     75




                                                                                       75
                            percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
                                    50




                                                                                      50
                                     25




                                                                                       25
                                     0




                                                                                       0




                                                          No contribution                            In between
                                                          Full contribution




                                                                       234


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Figure 4.L.3 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in
Monetary sanction experiment (Introduction condition)


                                                  Positive                                              Negative




                                    100




                                                                                      100
                                    75




                                                                                      75
                           percent of frequency




                                                                             percent of frequency
                                   50




                                                                                     50
                                    25




                                                                                      25
                                    0




                                                                                      0
                                                         No contribution                            In between
                                                         Full contribution




    b) To maximize group earning, if others fully contribute :

Figure 4.L.4 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize group payoff in Monetary
sanction experiment (Removal condition)


                                                  Positive                                              Negative
                                    100




                                                                                      100
                                    75




                                                                                      75
                           percent of frequency




                                                                             percent of frequency
                                   50




                                                                                     50
                                    25




                                                                                      25
                                    0




                                                                                      0




                                                         No contribution                            In between
                                                         Full contribution




                                                                      235


             Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing



Figure 4.L.5 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize group payoff in Monetary
sanction experiment (Introduction condition)


                                                      Positive                                              Negative




                                     100




                                                                                          100
                                     75




                                                                                          75
                            percent of frequency




                                                                                 percent of frequency
                                    50




                                                                                         50
                                     25




                                                                                          25
                                     0




                                                                                          0
                                                             No contribution                            In between
                                                             Full contribution




Table 4.L.3 – Percentage by stated contribution to maximize group payoff when others fully
contribute in Monetary sanction experiment

        Data considered                             All   data                         Removal                            Introduction
                                              Positive     Negative              Positive Negative                     Positive Negative
        No contribution                       10.23        19.00                 10.71     18.75                       9.38      22.22
        In between                            6.82         18.00                 3.57      18.75                       3.13      16.67
        Full contribution                     82.95        63.00                 85.71     62.50                       87.50     61.11


Table 4.L.4 – Percentage by stated contribution to maximize individual payoff when others fully
contribute in Monetary sanction experiment

        Data considered                             All   data                         Removal                            Introduction
                                              Positive     Negative              Positive Negative                     Positive Negative
        No contribution                       25.00        39.00                 28.57     53.13                       21.88     33.33
        In between                            11.36        16.00                 7.14      9.38                        12.50     19.44
        Full contribution                     63.64        45.00                 64.29     37.50                       65.63     47.22


Table 4.L.5 – Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the conditionnal contribution answerin Monetary
sanction experiment

 Data considered                                                        Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
                                                            To maximize individual gain To maximize group gain
 All data presented in this chapter                         0.077*                      0.048**
 When sanctions are applied                                 0.083*                      0.038**



4.L.3     Framing effect by subjects’ type for monetary sanctions experiment

    Although the number of observations is quite small compared to Park (2000)’s experiment
(cf table 5.B.5), I made some statistical tests.

                                                                          236


            Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




Mann Whitney test on the average contribution by type for monetary sanctions
experiment


   The average contribution rate is defined as follows the average contribution by subject and
by sequence. This is the observation used to run these tests.

    The difference of behavior depending on the frame in baseline conditions is only signifi-
cant for individualist subjects. This seems to corroborate Park (2000)’s argument that they
are sensitive to framing and that is the main driver of the different dynamics. Nevertheless it
seems that these differences of behavior do not persist during the second sequence of the Baseline
treatment.

   Concerning behavior linked to the availability of sanction :

   — In the Introduction condition : The behaviors are significantly different depending on the
     frame for both types.
   — In the Removal condition : It seems that the difference in contribution between the two
     framings is mainly induced by the difference in behavior of individualistic subjects between
     the two framings.

   Mann Whitney analysis of the framing effect by type.

Table 4.L.6 – Mann Whitney analysis of the average contribution by subjects types in Monetary
sanction experiment

                            Treatment                                     Mann Whitney p-value by Type
                                                                          Prosocial Individualist
 Baseline Treatment                            Sequence   1   Baseline    0.930     0.071*
                                               Sequence   2   Baseline    0.162     0.834
 Material sanctions   Introduction condition   Sequence   1   Baseline    0.146     0.004***
                                               Sequence   2   Sanctions   0.000 *** 0.000***
                      Removal condition        Sequence   1   Sanctions   0.620     0.048**
                                               Sequence   2   Baseline    0.320     0.086*



Mann Whitney test on the average contribution by type in the first period of each
sequence for monetary sanctions experiment

Table 4.L.7 – Mann Whitney analysis of contribution in the first period by types in Monetary
sanction experiment

                            Treatment                                     Mann Whitney p-value by Type
                                                                          Prosocial Individualist
 Baseline Treatment                            Sequence   1   Baseline    0.823     0.206
                                               Sequence   2   Baseline    0.340     0.776
 Material sanctions   Introduction condition   Sequence   1   Baseline    0.398     0.230
                                               Sequence   2   Sanctions   0.377     0.004***
                      Removal condition        Sequence   1   Sanctions   0.511     0.853
                                               Sequence   2   Baseline    0.035**   0.100




                                                 237


Chapter 3 : Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing




                                 238


                                                       Discussion of chapters 2 and 3
                                                                                                       5
This part is based on joint work with and Katherine Farrow, David Masclet and Marc
Willinger




    The pooled data of chapters 2 and 3 replicate the framing effect found by Andreoni (1995).
Subjects contribute more when the collective action issue is presented as having positive exter-
nalities, than when it is presented as having negative ones. However, Andreoni (1995)’s framing
effect as most of the framing effects, is fragile. Indeed, even under the Give and Take frame,
the higher level of contributions under the Give frame is not always observed and is not always
significant (Cox et al., 2013 ; Cox, 2015 ; Cubitt et al., 2010 ; Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ; Fosgaard
et al., 2014 ; Sell & Son, 1997 and Sell et al., 2002). In our data, the lack of robustness of the
results is partly due to three groups 1 , that have significantly higher contributions than others
(without any mechanism to foster cooperation). Nevertheless, the framing effect also depends
heavily on the inherent propensity of groups to cooperate. Once again, the groups that make
up the negative framing with symbolic sanctions in the Introduction condition seem to have a
strong willingness to cooperate, since they have a relatively high level of contribution in the first
period of the game and a relatively high stated willingness to contribute.

    Mechanisms that enable subjects to express their disapproval through cheap talk (symbolic
sanctions) or mechanism that can change the monetary incentives (monetary sanctions) signi-
ficantly increase contributions compared to Baseline conditions. It is worth noticing that those
two mechanisms are more effective in the Introduction condition, i.e. when they are introduced
after subjects first experienced a sequence in which disapproval of others’ actions was unavai-
lable. It is in line with Masclet et al. (2003) whose results about symbolic sanctions were found
in the same conditions, i.e. sanctions were introduced after a first sequence in which subjects
were unable to express their disapproval. Nevertheless, the efficiency of these two ways to express
disapproval is different. The level of symbolic sanctions sent out keeps increasing until the end of
the game while it decreases for monetary sanctions. Also, with symbolic sanctions, the increase
in contributions is lower than with monetary sanctions.

    Moreover, the lesser effectiveness of known mechanisms for promoting cooperation, in a frame
that emphasises negative externalities, is only observed for monetary sanctions in the Introduc-
tion condition. In the positive frame, after monetary sanctions are introduced, groups converge
  1. These groups compose the treatment negative framing with symbolic sanctions under Introduction condition


                                                    239


                                       Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




to full contribution. In contrast, such a dynamic is not observed in the negative frame : in the
Introduction condition, groups contribute on average half on their endowment to the public good.
It is worth noticing that in the negative frame and under all conditions, groups’ contributions
are more dispersed. Paradoxically, the frequency of disapproval (symbolic or monetary ones)
is higher in the negative frame. To sum up, the availability of sanctions in the positive frame
enables groups to converge to full contribution. This does not happen in the negative frame.
In a sense, we are partly replicating the results of Messer et al. (2013) who found that voting,
and communication were less effective under what they called negatively framed social dilemma.
Nevertheless, in our set of data, symbolic sanctions seem to be more efficient under the negative
frame. We argue that the greater effectiveness in these circumstances is mainly due to the fact
that some groups had a greater inherent propensity to cooperate, which is why they responded
strongly to mechanisms that promote cooperation.

    We try to go further in our understanding of how the frame impacts behaviors. From others
experiments, there is evidence that framing affects subjects’ perception (misperception), their
conditional cooperation, their reciprocity dynamics and their beliefs (Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ;
Fosgaard et al., 2014 ; Gächter et al., 2017 ; Gächter et al., (forthcoming) 2 ). In this experiment,
we did not elicit beliefs. However, we analyzed how framing affects the perception of the game,
the conditional willingness to cooperate and the reciprocity dynamic.



5.1      Does framing affect the perception of others’ decisions ?

    To understand subjects’ perception of the game, we analyze i) the ease with which subjects
establish the payoffs and ii) their perception about the effects of others actions.

     We measure and control the ease with which subjects determine the structure of earnings
according to the frame. To do so, before starting the public good game, we asked subjects
to answer multiple-choice questions about their winnings in different situations. The responses
were recorded to allow us to establish a comprehension score. After each question, the correct
answer and an explanation were posted to ensure that they had the correct answer in mind
before starting the main part of the experiment. As illustrated in figure 5.1, subjects had more
difficulties to initially figure out the payoffs in the negative frame. The difference is significant
using Epps Singleton test (p = 0.000). It reflects that the earnings are more complex to figure
out in this frame, due to the three sources of income. However, the framing effect cannot be
completely reduced to greater difficulty in calculating earnings. Indeed after each question, the
correct answer and detailed explanations were displayed to ensure that subjects had the correct
answer in mind before starting the VCM. Nevertheless, we hypothesize that the difficulty in
calculating earnings contributes to the negative perception created by the frame. It may interact
with the mechanisms that are supposed to foster cooperation, making cooperation more difficult.
   2. This article was presented in ESA Europe 2019 in Dijon. They use Fischbacher et al. (2001) to elicit subject’s
type, and they also replicate Fosgaard et al. (2014) questions.




                                                       240


                                                                                         Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



                    Figure 5.1 – Understanding score by framing (All data of chapters 2 and 3)

                                                                                          Negative framing                                                                   Positive framing




                                    10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80




                                                                                                                      10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
                                                    Frequency




                                                                                                                                      Frequency
                                                         5




                                                                                                                                           5
                                                         0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                   2         4            6       8                                                  0   2         4            6         8
                                                                                            Understanding                                                                     Understanding




    To analyze the impact of framing on the subjects’ perception, we ask subjects to qualify the
effect of others’ actions on their own gains at the end of the experiment. They could qualify them
as generating "i) important losses, ii) losses, iii) no gains or losses, iv) gains and v) important
gains". We pooled the results into three levels : 1) losses, 2) no gains or losses, 3) gains, to
generate a perception score. The ordered logit analysis presented in table 5.1 shows that the
perceptions of others’ actions are significantly better in the positive frame. This result remains
true when we control for the actual cooperation levels, adding the average sum of contributions
from the subject’s peers which is represented by the variable Average Peer Contributions (sum).
It seems to confirm the conjecture we made about the framing effects on perception.

             Table 5.1 – Perception of others actions for all framing data (ordered logit estimation).

                                                            (1)                                                        (2)                                                                   (3)                         (4)
                                                   QF_Perception_Effects2                                     QF_Perception_Effects2                                                QF_Perception_Effects2      QF_Perception_Effects2
 Framing                                                   0.523∗∗                                                    0.525∗∗                                                               0.614∗ ∗ ∗                  0.471∗∗
                                                          (0.213)                                                    (0.214)                                                               (0.232)                     (0.238)

 Symbolic sanctions applied                                                             0.207                          0.831∗                                                                        0.692              0.684
                                                                                       (0.310)                        (0.477)                                                                       (0.491)            (0.502)

 Material sanctions applied                                                             0.515∗                         1.130∗∗                                                                       1.019∗∗            0.753
                                                                                       (0.310)                        (0.475)                                                                       (0.490)            (0.501)

 Treatment order                                                                                                       -0.400∗                                                                       -0.330             -0.469∗
                                                                                                                      (0.234)                                                                       (0.239)            (0.247)

 SVO_score                                                                                                                                                                                           1.024∗             0.953
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.585)            (0.597)

 Gender                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.448∗∗           -0.527∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.218)            (0.224)

 Age                                                                                                                                                                                                0.00843             0.0138
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0295)           (0.0301)

 Understanding                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.111             -0.174∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0771)           (0.0807)

 Average Peer Contributions (sum)                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0447∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (0.0100)
 cut1
 _cons                                                                                  0.499∗                         0.498∗                                                                        0.381              0.810
                                                                                       (0.283)                        (0.283)                                                                       (0.903)            (0.926)
 cut2
 _cons                                                                                  1.219∗ ∗ ∗                     1.223∗ ∗ ∗                                                                    1.125              1.598∗
                                                                                       (0.289)                        (0.290)                                                                       (0.905)            (0.929)
 N                                                                                       324                            324                                                                           324                324
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                                                                                  241


                                     Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




5.2     How does framing affect the willingness to reciprocate ?

    Since the dynamics of reciprocity are stated to be one of the main drivers of group contribu-
tions and the effectiveness of symbolic and monetary sanctions, we analyse whether they have
been affected by the frame. As Messer et al. (2013) and Gächter et al. (2017) we states that
reciprocity reflect in the conditional cooperation, as it is the “willingness to cooperate provided
others do the same”. We first determine how the frame affects the stated conditional contribu-
tion. Second, we show how the frame affects the response to the contribution of others according
to subjects’ types regarding their social orientation (Murphy et al., 2011). Indeed, in these two
chapters, we show that the stronger subjects’ preference for equal sharing, the more they contri-
bute to the public good. In his replication of Andreoni (1995) ’s experiment, Park (2000) found
that depending on their social orientation subjects react differently to the frame 3 . Individualists
have a significantly lower level of contribution under the negative frame, whereas the frame does
not influence prosocial individuals. He concludes that individualists mainly drive the framing
effect. In order to find out whether this is also the case in our data, we analyze subjects’ i)
average contribution, ii) stated conditional contribution ; iii) the way they modify their contri-
butions according to their type and for each frame. For the latter, we adapt the learning analysis
of Bigoni and Suetens (2012), which was firstly introduced by Huck et al. (1999). This analysis
aims to determine which strategy best explains the way subjects update their contribution after
each period.

    To identify the impact of the frame on the stated willingness to replicate, we reproduce
Fosgaard et al. (2014)’s questions at the end of the experiment. These questions determine the
willingness of subjects to contribute depending on the contribution of others. Subjects are asked
what they would do to (i) maximize their own income and (ii) maximize the income of the
group. For both objectives, they were presented with two situations regarding the contribution
of their peers. In the first situation, they were told that the other subjects did not contribute.
In the second situation, they were told that the other members of the group contributed fully
to the public good. For both framings, regardless of the objective, when subjects are asked to
respond to, they all state that they will not contribute if the other subjects do not contribute
either. Conversely, when they are told that others will fully contribute, a majority of subjects
answer that they will also fully contribute, in both frames and regardless of the objective they
are asked to respond. We conclude that subjects do not approach the game strategically, but
that a reciprocity dynamic strongly drives their behavior. Indeed, if they behaved strategically,
they would not contribute in order to maximize their personal income and would contribute fully
in order to maximize the group’s income, regardless of the contributions of others. These results
are in accordance with Fischbacher et al. (2001), who showed that for a majority of subjects are
conditional cooperators.

    However, it should be pointed out that the frame also impacts the percentage of subjects
who declare that they will fully contribute if others do so. When asked what they would do
to maximize the group’s benefits, the percentage of full contributors is significantly lower in the
negative frame with 63% versus 83% in the positive frame. (see figure 5.2, p = 0.001, Kolmogorov
Smirnov test). If we consider that this answer reflects a preference for cooperation, we should
conclude that the negative frame deters cooperation. This is in line with the results of Fosgaard
et al. (2014), Gächter et al. (2017) and Gächter et al. (forthcoming) who showed that in the take
frame there is a low percentage of conditional cooperators and a higher percentage of free riders.
  3. Park (2000) applied an older version of Murphy’s social orientation test




                                                     242


                                                 Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



                 Figure 5.2 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Baseline

                                                   Positive                                              Negative




                                   100




                                                                                       100
                                   75




                                                                                       75
                          percent of frequency




                                                                              percent of frequency
                                  50




                                                                                      50
                                   25




                                                                                       25
                                   0




                                                                                       0
                                                          No contribution                            In between
                                                          Full contribution




   Is the reaction of different types of subjects to sanctions affected by framing ?

   First note that the distribution of types is frame independent (see table 5.2). Thus, the diffe-
rence between the two frames is not due to a difference in the distribution of types. We, therefore,
analyze whether the reaction to the frame is different depending on subjects’ types, as suggested
by Park (2000)’s experiment. To do so, we make three kinds of analyses, distinguishing between
prosocial and individualistic subjects. Competitive subjects cannot be considered because their
number is too small.
                Table 5.2 – SVO type summary statistics for all framing data

                     Treatment                                                         Prosocial              Individualist   Competitive
       Symbolic sanctions Negative Framing                                                32                       35             1
                           Positive Framing                                               25                       40             3
       Monetary sanctions Negative Framing                                                33                       41             4
                           Positive Framing                                               24                       34             2
       Baseline Treatment Negative Framing                                                14                       17             1
                           Positive Framing                                               15                       13             0
       All data            Negative Framing                                               69                       93             6
                           Positive Framing                                               64                       87             5

   Firstly, we compare the average contribution in the first sequence without sanctions between
subjects’ types. It appears that our results are in line with Park (2000). The difference of contri-
butions between the two frames is mostly due to individualistic subjects, who have a significantly
lower contribution in the negative frame.

   — If we consider all the data, we do not observe a difference in average contributions to the
     public good based on framings. This effect is partly explained by three groups composing
     the negative framing with symbolic sanctions in the Introduction condition, which have
     a high level of contribution in the first sequence (baseline) even though they are mainly
     composed of individualists. If we exclude these three groups, we find a small significant
     difference between the two frames for individualistic subjects (p = 0.068, Mann Whitney)
     and no difference for prosocial subjects (p = 0.187, Mann Whitney).


                                                                       243


                                                        Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




   — If we consider the first sequence of the Baseline treatment and of the Monetary sanctions in
     the Introduction condition, we also find a significant difference for individualistic subjects
     (Baseline p = 0.071 and Monetary sanctions Introduction p = 0.004, Mann Whitney) but
     not for prosocial subjects.

    Secondly, the variation of the stated conditional contribution is larger for individualistic
subjects. As illustrated in figure 5.3, individualistic subjects are relatively more willing to fully
cooperate under the positive frame and relatively less willing to fully contribute under the nega-
tive frame. For this type, the difference between the two frames is significant using Kolmogorov
Smirnov test p = 0.044, whereas it is not p = 0.886 for prosocial subjects.

       Figure 5.3 – Stated contributions by type when others fully contribute for all framing data

                                                            Prosocial                                                                    Individualist
                                                 Positive                                 Negative                                 Positive                            Negative
                                   100




                                                                          100




                                                                                                                     100




                                                                                                                                                         100
                                   75




                                                                          75




                                                                                                                     75




                                                                                                                                                         75
                          percent of frequency




                                                                 percent of frequency




                                                                                                            percent of frequency




                                                                                                                                                percent of frequency
                                  50




                                                                         50




                                                                                                                    50




                                                                                                                                                        50
                                   25




                                                                          25




                                                                                                                     25




                                                                                                                                                         25
                                   0




                                                                          0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                        No contribution                                In between
                                                                                        Full contribution




   Lastly, to study how subjects update their contribution over time, we adopt the method of
Huck et al.(1999) and Bigoni and Suetens (2012). We analyze how different learning strategies
can explain contribution changes occurring between two successive periods (t and t − 1). The
analysis is described by the following equation :


                   yit − yit−1 = β0 + β1 DAverageit + β2 DM init + β3 DM axit                                                                                                     (5.1)


    yit refers to subject i’s contribution to the group account in the period t. DAverageit is the
difference between the group’s average contribution and subject i contribution in period (t − 1).
If subject i’s contribution change between period t and t − 1 corresponds to the DAverageit , we
consider that he expresses a taste for conformity. Following Luzzati (1999), we hypothesise that
the willingness to conform to social norms strongly influences economic decisions. As a conse-
quence, conformity preference shapes subjects utility functions. Carpenter (2004) ’s experiment
demonstrates that the taste for conformity is a strong driver of groups’ dynamic in public good
games, and the reason why the display of individual contributions can lead to a faster decrease
of contributions.

    DM init is the difference between the lowest contribution in the group and subject i contri-
bution in the previous period. In the absence of disapproval ratings (symbolic or monetary
sanctions), individual contributions were not displayed. In this case, we consider the lowest pos-
sible contribution (i.e. zero = free-riding). Moreover, in our voluntary contribution mechanism,

                                                                                                     244


                                        Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




not contributing is the best response to any group contribution, under the standard assumption.

    In comparison, DM axit refers to the difference between the highest contribution of the group
minus subject i’s contribution in the previous period. When individual contributions were not
displayed, we consider that the highest possible contribution is the full contribution. The full
contribution represents one of the possible equilibriums when monetary sanctions are applied
only if there is a sufficient number of subjects who are opposed to inequality (Fehr & Smith,
1999).

    In order to analyze whether the frame impacts the contribution dynamics, we include in-
teractions variables of the framing with DAverageit ,DM init and DM axit . Note that for this
analysis, we need to exclude the first period of each sequence.

    Looking at the first sequence without symbolic or monetary sanctions, the main drivers of
group dynamics are the "imitation of the average" and the adoption of "free-riding behavior".
Both of these learning patterns are positively and significantly correlated with the change in
contribution, as shown in table 5.3. Note that the adoption of free-riding behavior appears to be
slightly less important in the positive frame, as the interaction variable Free rider × Framing is
negatively and significantly correlated with the change in contribution. It confirms our results
regarding the lower contributions in the negative frame. This difference seems to be generated
by Prosocial individuals who are relatively less likely to adopt free-riding behavior. Nevertheless,
in these conditions we observe that the main drivers of contribution changes are identical for
Prosocial and Individualist subjects (as illustrated in tables 5.4 and 5.5).

 Table 5.3 – Learning analysis of Sequence 1, panel tobit estimations two sided random effects (All data).

                                       (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
                                 extct_adjtmt       extct_adjtmt      extct_adjtmt      extct_adjtmt
 Imitate the Average                  1.019∗ ∗ ∗         1.027∗ ∗ ∗        1.030∗ ∗ ∗        1.030∗ ∗ ∗
                                    (0.0169)           (0.0227)          (0.0227)          (0.0228)

 Free rider                            0.868∗ ∗ ∗       0.868∗ ∗ ∗        0.891∗ ∗ ∗        0.888∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0141)         (0.0141)          (0.0184)          (0.0191)

 Full contributor                        0                 0                 0                 0
                                        (.)               (.)               (.)               (.)

 Imitate the Average × Framing                         -0.0169           -0.0234           -0.0226
                                                      (0.0335)          (0.0337)          (0.0337)

 Free rider × Framing                                                    -0.0485∗∗         -0.0534∗∗
                                                                        (0.0247)          (0.0272)

 Full contributor × Framing                                                                0.0101
                                                                                          (0.0232)

 _cons                                -7.013∗ ∗ ∗       -7.013∗ ∗ ∗       -7.006∗ ∗ ∗       -6.911∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.233)           (0.233)           (0.233)           (0.316)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                2.774∗ ∗ ∗        2.775∗ ∗ ∗        2.769∗ ∗ ∗        2.768∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.165)           (0.165)           (0.164)           (0.164)
 sigma_e
 _cons                                 3.283∗ ∗ ∗       3.282∗ ∗ ∗        3.280∗ ∗ ∗        3.280∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0596)         (0.0596)          (0.0596)          (0.0596)
 N                                     1836             1836              1836              1836
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                          245


                                        Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



Table 5.4 – Learning analysis of Sequence 1 for Prosocial subjects, panel tobit estimations two sided random
effects (All data)

                                       (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
                                 extct_adjtmt       extct_adjtmt      extct_adjtmt      extct_adjtmt
 Imitate the Average                  1.010∗ ∗ ∗         1.047∗ ∗ ∗        1.056∗ ∗ ∗        1.056∗ ∗ ∗
                                    (0.0267)           (0.0370)          (0.0372)          (0.0372)

 Free rider                            0.880∗ ∗ ∗       0.881∗ ∗ ∗        0.922∗ ∗ ∗        0.916∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0213)         (0.0213)          (0.0281)          (0.0300)

 Full contributor                        0                 0                 0                 0
                                        (.)               (.)               (.)               (.)

 Imitate the Average × Framing                         -0.0769           -0.0905∗          -0.0899∗
                                                      (0.0521)          (0.0524)          (0.0524)

 Free rider × Framing                                                    -0.0804∗∗         -0.0876∗∗
                                                                        (0.0362)          (0.0384)

 Full contributor × Framing                                                                0.0193
                                                                                          (0.0347)

 _cons                                -7.674∗ ∗ ∗       -7.683∗ ∗ ∗       -7.661∗ ∗ ∗       -7.468∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.349)           (0.351)           (0.348)           (0.490)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                2.534∗ ∗ ∗        2.558∗ ∗ ∗        2.519∗ ∗ ∗        2.515∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.238)           (0.240)           (0.237)           (0.237)
 sigma_e
 _cons                                 3.342∗ ∗ ∗       3.335∗ ∗ ∗        3.331∗ ∗ ∗        3.330∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0934)         (0.0932)          (0.0930)          (0.0930)
 N                                      774              774               774               774
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




                                                          246


                                        Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



Table 5.5 – Learning analysis of Sequence 1 for Individualist subjects, panel tobit estimations two sided random
effects.

                                       (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
                                 extct_adjtmt       extct_adjtmt      extct_adjtmt      extct_adjtmt
 Imitate the Average                  1.016∗ ∗ ∗         1.000∗ ∗ ∗        1.000∗ ∗ ∗        1.001∗ ∗ ∗
                                    (0.0220)           (0.0291)          (0.0291)          (0.0291)

 Free rider                            0.858∗ ∗ ∗       0.859∗ ∗ ∗        0.865∗ ∗ ∗        0.865∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0190)         (0.0190)          (0.0245)          (0.0253)

 Full contributor                        0                 0                 0                 0
                                        (.)               (.)               (.)               (.)

 Imitate the Average × Framing                         0.0366            0.0350            0.0349
                                                      (0.0439)          (0.0441)          (0.0442)

 Free rider × Framing                                                    -0.0133           -0.0130
                                                                        (0.0337)          (0.0378)

 Full contributor × Framing                                                               -0.000588
                                                                                           (0.0310)

 _cons                                -6.575∗ ∗ ∗       -6.580∗ ∗ ∗       -6.579∗ ∗ ∗       -6.585∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.310)           (0.311)           (0.311)           (0.418)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                2.856∗ ∗ ∗        2.862∗ ∗ ∗        2.865∗ ∗ ∗        2.865∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.226)           (0.226)           (0.227)           (0.227)
 sigma_e
 _cons                                 3.223∗ ∗ ∗       3.221∗ ∗ ∗        3.221∗ ∗ ∗        3.221∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0781)         (0.0781)          (0.0781)          (0.0781)
 N                                     1035             1035              1035              1035
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




    When monetary sanctions are available, the imitation of the average remains the principal
driver of the group contribution dynamic, as illustrated in tables 5.6, 5.7 and 5.8. Nevertheless,
we find a strong difference in the learning strategies adopted depending on the frame.

    In the Positive frame, there is less imitation of the average, more imitation of the highest
and, in a lesser proportion, of the lowest contribution displayed by the group. The interaction
variables DAverage × F raming, DM in × F raming and DM ax × F raming have a significant
effect on the contribution dynamics, which are respectively negative for the former and positive
for the two latter. It reflects the fact that whith monetary sanctions in the positive frame, the
trend is less driven by the average and subjects are more likely to imitate the highest and in a
lesser extend the lower contribution contribution.

    This effect is mainly explained by subjects characterized as individualistic with regards to
their SVO score, who change their contribution strategies according to the frame. They are less
likely to follow the average in the positive frame, but more likely to adopt the highest or the
lowest contribution displayed. In comparison, the contribution strategy of Prosocial individual
does not seem to be frame dependent, because in both cases, they mainly follow the average
contribution. Moreover, it is important to note that in the Introduction condition, the different
reaction to monetary sanctions of individualist subjects is observed since the first period after
their introduction. For this type of subjects, their first period contributions are significantly
different depending on the frame (p = 0.005, Mann Whitney), whereas we do not observe a

                                                          247


                                      Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




difference for prosocial subjects. This result might explain why the introduction of monetary
sanctions enables groups to converge towards full contribution in the positive frame but not in
the negative frame, although the proportion of prosocial subjects is equivalent in both frames.
Indeed, if we assume that pro-sociability is a proxy for inequality aversion, both frames present
a relatively high number of subjects who should have an interest in being cooperative enforcers
when monetary sanctions are available. As a consequence, full contribution might also become
one of the possible equilibrium (Fehr & Smith, 1999). However, individualist subjects do not
react the same way to the introduction of sanctions depending on the frame. They are less likely
to imitate the highest contribution displayed in the negative frame.


Table 5.6 – Learning analysis when monetary sanctions are available, panel tobit estimations two sided random
effects (All data).

                                        (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                   extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt
 Imitate the Average                   0.868∗ ∗ ∗       0.903∗ ∗ ∗       0.879∗ ∗ ∗       1.039∗ ∗ ∗
                                      (0.106)          (0.108)          (0.110)          (0.125)

 Lowest contribution                  -0.0966∗         -0.0960∗         -0.0744          -0.142∗∗
                                     (0.0528)         (0.0527)         (0.0568)         (0.0624)

 Maximal contribution                 -0.0825          -0.0841∗         -0.0855∗         -0.161∗ ∗ ∗
                                     (0.0514)         (0.0511)         (0.0510)         (0.0590)

 Imitate the Average × Framing                         -0.116∗          -0.0594           -0.602∗ ∗ ∗
                                                      (0.0690)         (0.0890)          (0.228)

 Lowest contribution × Framing                                          -0.0573           0.198∗
                                                                       (0.0569)          (0.114)

 Maximal contribution × Framing                                                           0.291∗∗
                                                                                         (0.113)

 _cons                                0.0406           0.0500           0.0518           0.0521
                                      (0.247)          (0.243)          (0.242)          (0.250)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                 1.091∗ ∗ ∗       1.013∗ ∗ ∗       0.974∗ ∗ ∗       1.143∗ ∗ ∗
                                      (0.312)          (0.328)          (0.339)          (0.312)
 sigma_e
 _cons                                 4.669∗ ∗ ∗       4.676∗ ∗ ∗       4.679∗ ∗ ∗       4.638∗ ∗ ∗
                                      (0.112)          (0.112)          (0.113)          (0.111)
 N                                     1152             1152             1152             1152
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                        248


                                       Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



Table 5.7 – Learning analysis when monetary sanctions are available for Prosocial subjects, panel tobit esti-
mations two sided random effects.

                                         (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                    extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt
 Imitate the Average                    1.173∗ ∗ ∗       1.216∗ ∗ ∗       1.184∗ ∗ ∗       1.280∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (0.160)          (0.165)          (0.169)          (0.194)

 Lowest contribution                   -0.251∗ ∗ ∗      -0.254∗ ∗ ∗      -0.227∗ ∗ ∗      -0.264∗ ∗ ∗
                                      (0.0775)         (0.0776)         (0.0846)         (0.0921)

 Maximal contribution                  -0.137∗          -0.137∗          -0.140∗          -0.183∗∗
                                      (0.0788)         (0.0785)         (0.0786)         (0.0904)

 Imitate the Average × Framing                           -0.120          -0.0303           -0.360
                                                        (0.109)          (0.158)          (0.373)

 Lowest contribution × Framing                                           -0.0757          0.0704
                                                                        (0.0960)          (0.178)

 Maximal contribution × Framing                                                            0.192
                                                                                          (0.198)

 _cons                                 0.0890           0.0989           0.0895           0.0651
                                       (0.393)          (0.389)          (0.391)          (0.407)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                  1.537∗ ∗ ∗       1.504∗ ∗ ∗       1.527∗ ∗ ∗       1.688∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (0.346)          (0.347)          (0.350)          (0.387)
 sigma_e
 _cons                                  3.857∗ ∗ ∗       3.857∗ ∗ ∗       3.850∗ ∗ ∗       3.816∗ ∗ ∗
                                       (0.147)          (0.147)          (0.147)          (0.148)
 N                                       423              423              423              423
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




                                                         249


                                        Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



Table 5.8 – Learning analysis when monetary sanctions are available for Individualist subjects, panel tobit
estimations two sided random effects.

                                        (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)
                                   extct_adjtmt       extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt     extct_adjtmt
 Imitate the Average                   0.676∗ ∗ ∗         0.707∗ ∗ ∗       0.675∗ ∗ ∗       0.910∗ ∗ ∗
                                      (0.137)            (0.141)          (0.143)          (0.161)

 Lowest contribution                    -0.00321        -0.00257          0.0284           -0.0740
                                        (0.0699)        (0.0699)         (0.0756)         (0.0820)

 Maximal contribution                   0.00680         0.00400          0.00175           -0.122
                                        (0.0682)        (0.0680)         (0.0677)         (0.0781)

 Imitate the Average × Framing                           -0.0876          -0.0144           -0.853∗ ∗ ∗
                                                        (0.0908)          (0.114)          (0.292)

 Lowest contribution × Framing                                            -0.0802           0.312∗∗
                                                                         (0.0753)          (0.146)

 Maximal contribution × Framing                                                             0.451∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                           (0.145)

 _cons                                  -0.0906          -0.0878          -0.0777          -0.0345
                                        (0.327)          (0.325)          (0.320)          (0.325)
 sigma_u
 _cons                                   1.044∗∗          0.992∗∗          0.892∗           0.958∗∗
                                        (0.440)          (0.456)          (0.499)          (0.459)
 sigma_e
 _cons                                   4.865∗ ∗ ∗       4.869∗ ∗ ∗       4.880∗ ∗ ∗       4.833∗ ∗ ∗
                                        (0.152)          (0.152)          (0.154)          (0.151)
 N                                        675              675              675              675
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01




     To conclude, the frame affects the willingness to contribute to the public good. In this sense,
we partly replicated Andreoni (1995) ’s results, showing that "warm glow" is relatively more
efficient in promoting cooperation than the "cold prickle". However, the framing effect is fragile
and depends on the inherent group’s willingness to cooperate. Moreover, as others have shown,
we find that enabling subjects to express their disapproval (through symbolic and monetary
sanctions) increases contributions. More interestingly, we found that the frame interacts with
the efficiency of monetary sanctions.

    Framing impacts subjects’ perception of others’ actions and their willingness to reciprocate to
others’ contributions. In the negative frame, they have more difficulties to figure out the payoffs,
and they consider that others’ actions generate losses to them. Moreover, the frame influences the
stated willingness to reciprocate to others contributions, as the percentage of subjects who declare
they would fully contribute if others do so is lower in the negative frame. Those results are in line
with other framing effects, such as the give and take frame, which seems to impacts perception
(misperception), conditional cooperation and beliefs (Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ; Fosgaard et al.,
2014 ; Gächter et al., 2017 ; Gächter et al., forthcoming).

    The fact that the way the game is framed and perceived can affect the ability of groups to
cooperate is an interesting result. More investigations have to be done to better understand how
the details about the payoffs structure and the kind of information delivered to the subjects may
impact their perception and their willingness to cooperate.

                                                          250


                                  Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




    Additionally, as Park (2000), we also find that the framing effect is stronger for individualists.
They have a significantly lower level of contribution in the negative frame without any disapproval
ratings. They present a stronger difference in their stated conditional answer, and they react
differently to the introduction of monetary sanctions depending on the frame.

    This is why taking into account individual heterogeneity, and more specifically, the interaction
between social preferences and the frame seems to offer a fruitful avenue for future research. It
could enable to better understand, if individualistic subjects act as they do because they have a
better understanding of economic incentives or, on the contrary, because they are more sensitive
to any message that highlights potential gains or losses in social interactions. In other words,
they are less likely to bear the cost (or take the risk) of social interactions that are presented as
having potential negative externalities.




                                                 251


                               Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




References

   ANDREONI, J. 1995. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : the effects of positive and negative
framing on cooperation in experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1-21.

   BIGONI, M. & SUETENS, S. 2012. Feedback and dynamics in public good experiments.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 82, 86-95.

   CARPENTER, J. P. 2004. When in Rome : conformity and the provision of public goods.
The Journal of Socio-Economics, 33, 395-408.

   COX, C. A. 2015. Decomposing the effects of negative framing in linear public goods games.
Economics Letters, 126, 63-65.

    COX, J. C., OSTROM, E., SADIRAJ, V. & WALKER, J. M. 2013. Provision versus appro-
priation in symmetric and asymmetric social dilemmas. Southern Economic Journal, 79, 496-512.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M. & GÄCHTER, S. 2011. Framing and free riding : emotional
responses and punishment in social dilemma games. Experimental Economics, 14, 254-272.

   DUFWENBERG, M., GÄCHTER, S. & HENNIG-SCHMIDT, H. 2011. The framing of games
and the psychology of play. Games and Economic Behavior, 73, 459-478.

   FEHR, E. & GÄCHTER, S. 2000. Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods Experi-
ments. The American Economic Review, 90, 980-994.

   FEHR, E. & SCHMIDT, K. M. 1999. A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
Quarterly journal of Economics, 817-868.

    FOSGAARD, T. R., HANSEN, L. G. & WENGSTRÖM, E. 2014. Understanding the nature
of cooperation variability. Journal of Public Economics, 120, 134-143.

    GÄCHTER, S., KOELLE, F. & QUERCIA, S. 2017. Reciprocity and the tragedies of main-
taining and providing the commons Nature Human Behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9),
650-656.

   HUCK, S., NORMANN, H.-T. & OECHSSLER, J. 1999. Learning in Cournot Oligopoly –
an Experiment. The Economic Journal, 109, 80-95.

   KAHNEMAN, D. 1992. Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed feelings. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51, 296-312.

   LUZZATI, T. 1999. Economic theory and conformism (Vol. 68). Edward Elgar Publishing,
Cheltenham Glos, UK.

   MASCLET, D., NOUSSAIR, C., TUCKER, S. & VILLEVAL, M.-C. 2003. Monetary and
nonmonetary punishment in the voluntary contributions mechanism. The American Economic
Review, 93, 366-380.

   MESSER, K. D., SUTER, J. F. & YAN, J. 2013. Context effects in a negatively framed social

                                            252


                               Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




dilemma experiment. Environmental and Resource Economics, 55, 387-405.

    MURPHY, R. O., ACKERMANN, K. A. & HANDGRAAF, M. 2011. Measuring social value
orientation. Judgment and Decision Making, 6, 771-781.

    PARK, E.-S. 2000. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : a further experimental study of framing
effects on free-riding. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 43, 405-421.

    SELL, J., CHEN, Z.-Y., HUNTER-HOLMES, P. & JOHANSSON, A. C. 2002. A Cross-
Cultural Comparison of Public Good and Resource Good Settings. Social Psychology Quarterly,
65, 285-297.

   SELL, J. & SON, Y. 1997. Comparing Public Goods with Common Pool Resources : Three
Experiments. Social Psychology Quarterly, 60, 118-137.

   TVERSKY, A. & KAHNEMAN, D. 1981. The framing of decisions and the psychology of
choice. Science, 211, 453-458.




                                            253


Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




             254


                       Appendices of the discussion of chapters 2 and 3




5.A     Perception

    The results were transformed to generate a perception score. The ordered logit analysis pre-
sented in table 5.A.1, shows that the perceptions of others actions is significantly better in the
positive frame. It seems to confirm the conjecture we made about the framing effects on percep-
tion. However, it can be objected that the perception is mainly due to a level of cooperation and
thus gains that is relatively higher in the positive frame. Nevertheless, in the baseline treatment
the positive perception of others actions, represent the double than the negative one, whereas
there is no such a difference between the contributions of those two frames. Moreover, we control
for the group real cooperation, adding the average of peer contribution by subjects. This variable
reduces the framing effect. However, if we pool the levels of answer, only considering : 1) gains,
2) no gains or losses, 3) losses ; the framing effect on perception remain positive and significant (a
illustrated in table 5.1). Symbolic sanctions applied and Material sanctions applied are a dummy
variables that is equal to one when respectively material sanctions or symbolic sanctions were
available during the experiment. Average Peer Contributions (sum) represents the average sum of
contributions from the subject’s peers (other group members) It seems to confirm the conjecture
we made about the framing effects on perception.




                                                 255


                                             Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



             Table 5.A.1 – Perception of others actions for all framing data (ordered logit analysis).

                                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)
                                    QF_Perception_Effects   QF_Perception_Effects   QF_Perception_Effects   QF_Perception_Effects
 Framing                                   0.449∗∗                 0.449∗∗                 0.546∗∗                 0.373∗
                                          (0.202)                 (0.203)                 (0.215)                 (0.220)

 Symbolic sanctions applied                 0.225                   0.910∗∗                 0.746                   0.737
                                           (0.284)                 (0.453)                 (0.464)                 (0.467)

 Material sanctions applied                 0.500∗                  1.161∗ ∗ ∗              1.018∗∗                 0.779∗
                                           (0.288)                 (0.447)                 (0.458)                 (0.464)

 Treatment order                                                    -0.432∗                 -0.359                  -0.526∗∗
                                                                   (0.223)                 (0.226)                 (0.230)

 SVO_score                                                                                  0.986∗                  0.941∗
                                                                                           (0.546)                 (0.550)

 Gender                                                                                     -0.363∗                 -0.416∗∗
                                                                                           (0.204)                 (0.206)

 Age                                                                                      0.00974                  0.0183
                                                                                          (0.0273)                (0.0277)

 Understanding                                                                             -0.116                  -0.185∗∗
                                                                                          (0.0711)                (0.0736)

 Average Peer Contributions (sum)                                                                                  0.0481∗ ∗ ∗
                                                                                                                  (0.00935)
 cut1
 _cons                                      -1.074∗ ∗ ∗             -1.082∗ ∗ ∗             -1.233                  -0.737
                                           (0.268)                 (0.269)                 (0.838)                 (0.849)
 cut2
 _cons                                      0.454∗                  0.455∗                  0.341                   0.902
                                           (0.261)                 (0.261)                 (0.835)                 (0.849)
 cut3
 _cons                                      1.172∗ ∗ ∗              1.179∗ ∗ ∗              1.082                   1.688∗∗
                                           (0.268)                 (0.268)                 (0.837)                 (0.852)
 cut4
 _cons                                      3.715∗ ∗ ∗              3.736∗ ∗ ∗              3.661∗ ∗ ∗              4.416∗ ∗ ∗
                                           (0.377)                 (0.379)                 (0.878)                 (0.901)
 N                                           324                     324                     324                     324
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * p<0.10 ; ** p<0.05 ; *** p<0.01




5.B        Strategic understanding

    To understand the subjects’ strategical understaning of the game, we replicate Fosgaard et
al. (2014) final questionnary at the end of the experiment.

   There are two kinds of questions, representing two kinds of objectives. The first type of
question asks what will be their contribution in order to maximize their own payoffs. The second
type of question asks what would be their contribution in order to maximize the group earning.
For both objectives, they were presented with two situations concerning the contribution of the
other members of the group.

    As a result, it seems that subjects do not get the strategical aspect of the game. Indeed, their
behavior seem to be driven by reciprocity. All the subjects in the two frames declare that they
will not contribute to the public good if others do not contribute for both objectives (individual
and group maximization).

   Conversely, in both frames a majority of subjects declare that they will fully contribute to
the public good if others are full contributors. These results corroborate the fact that subjects
behave as conditionnal cooperators.

   Nevertheless, it seems that the frame also impacts their stated willingness to reciprocate to
others contributions. The percentage of subjects who declare that they will fully contribute is


                                                               256


                                                               Discussion of chapters 2 and 3




lower in the negative frame.

   The questions specified that they had to answer how much they will contribute to public
good when there were no sanctions that can be delivered :

Figure 5.B.1 – Stated contributions if others fully contribute for all framing data (in order to maximize
individual payoff)


                                                                     Positive                                                                           Negative
                                         100




                                                                                                                              100
                                         75




                                                                                                                              75
                              percent of frequency




                                                                                                                   percent of frequency
                                      50




                                                                                                                           50
                                         25




                                                                                                                              25
                                         0




                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                               No contribution                                   In between
                                                                                               Full contribution




Figure 5.B.2 – Stated contributions by type when others fully contribute for all framing data (in order to
maximize individual payoff)

                                                                   Prosocial                                                                       Individualist
                                                        Positive                                 Negative                                    Positive                             Negative
                                          100




                                                                                 100




                                                                                                                               100




                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                          75




                                                                                 75




                                                                                                                               75




                                                                                                                                                                    75
                                 percent of frequency




                                                                        percent of frequency




                                                                                                                      percent of frequency




                                                                                                                                                           percent of frequency
                                         50




                                                                                50




                                                                                                                              50




                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                          25




                                                                                 25




                                                                                                                               25




                                                                                                                                                                    25
                                          0




                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                               No contribution                                   In between
                                                                                               Full contribution




Table 5.B.1 – Percentage of stated contribution categories by contributor types, to maximize
group payoff when others fully contribute

       Data considered                                    All          data                                             Prosocial                                                               Individualist
                                                    Positive            Negative                                   Positive Negative                                                         Positive Negative
       No contribution                              8.97                17.86                                      14.06     18.84                                                           4.60      16.13
       In between                                   8.33                15.48                                      6.25      11.59                                                           9.20      18.28
       Full contribution                            82.69               66.67                                      79.69     69.57                                                           86.21     65.59



                                                                                                            257


                                Discussion of chapters 2 and 3



Table 5.B.2 – Percentage of stated contribution by contributor types to maximize individual
payoff when others fully contribute

      Data considered           All   data              Prosocial               Introduction
                          Positive     Negative    Positive Negative         Positive Negative
      No contribution     23.08        33.93       25.00     23.19           20.69     40.86
      In between          12.18        14.88       12.50     17.39           11.49     11.83
      Full contribution   64.74        51.19       62.50     59.42           67.82     47.31


 Table 5.B.3 – Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the conditionnal contribution answer by frame

        Data considered                    Kolmogorov-Smirnov p-value
                               To maximize individual gain To maximize group gain
        All data               0.102                       0.031**
        Prosocial individual   1.000                       0.886
        Individualist          0.046**                     0.044**


Table 5.B.4 – Mann Whitney test on the average contribution by subject for Baseline in the
first sequence (p-value)

         Data considered                                            Mann Whitney p-value
         All data                                                   0.133
         Prosocial individual                                       0.333
         Individualist                                              0.486
         All data cooperative groups excluded                       0.007**
         Prosocial individual cooperative groups excluded           0.187
         Individualist cooperative groups excluded                  0.068*


         Table 5.B.5 – SVO type number by treatment in Park (2000)’s experiment

                    Treatment                           Prosocial   Individualist   Competitive   Other
 Baseline Treatment (All data) Negative Framing            30            68             1           1
                               Positive Framing            34            63             0           3




                                                  258


                                                                      General conclusion




    In this concluding part we firstly sum up the main results of the two lines of inquiry we
developed in the thesis, namely i) the effect of the disclosure of individuals’ actions in a common
pool context and ii) how the way the collective action issue is presented influences group dynamic
in a public good context. For these two topics, we propose a debate about the specific limits and
potential extensions that could have been done in the laboratory. We strongly believe that the
laboratory has considerable advantages in identifying and disentangling the effects of the measure
under study, in our case : social information. With the same force we believe that, while this work
is absolutely necessary to try to capture generalities in human behavior, it is not sufficient to
presuppose the effects of a measure in a given concrete situation. To do so, a deep understanding
of the micro situational context is necessary. As we will briefly argue at the end of this discussion,
tools and methods to achieve this, have yet to be developed. In the last part of this discussion,
we will identify common issues arising from the two themes developed in this thesis on the effect
of information on collective action when natural resource management is at stake.



Chapter 1 results and perspectives from the literature

    In the first chapter, we show that the mechanism based on the voluntary display of extrac-
tions is not efficient to promote cooperation. Nevertheless, in the early periods following its
introduction, voluntary disclosure is used to signal a willingness to cooperate. Subjects who are
in favour of display have significantly lower extractions than those who are against it. Thus, the
effectiveness of communication (cheap talk) in bringing collective action to a successful conclu-
sion is not only explained by the fact that it allows subjects to signal their type, nor by the fact
that it allows a majority of subjects to agree on their willingness to disclose their extractions.
These voluntary mechanisms cannot influence the increase in extraction when applied alone, and
cannot prevent overexploitation of the resource.

    In this experiment, we also demonstrate that an important part of the subjects does have
social preferences, more precisely preferences for equal sharing. Those preferences lead them to
have relatively lower extraction levels. However, these social preferences alone are not sufficient to
generate and maintain cooperation. Through the game, the extraction keeps on increasing. This
result is nevertheless consistent with the theoretical predictions, which show that preferences

                                                 259


                                        General conclusion




for inequality aversion or conformity can lead group extraction to increase when this latter is
displayed. The analysis of the extractions’ evolution shows that the learning models that best
explain group dynamics are : the imitation of the average and the self-interested best response.

    Nevertheless, we must highlight that when individuals’ extractions are automatically disclosed
(Compulsory treatment), we observe a difference in the extraction strategies according to the
orientation value of the subjects. This difference cannot be observed when subjects obtain only
aggregate extraction. When all extractions are displayed, individualistic subjects are more likely
to imitate the Highest extraction and are less likely to follow the Average extraction. Whereas for
prosocial subjects, extraction dynamic is mainly explained by a combination of the imitation of
the Average extraction displayed and the Self-interested best response. To a lesser extent, they also
imitate the Exemplary. Though, this last strategy is not adopted to a sufficient extent by all group
members to affect group extraction dynamics. This adoption of the Highest extraction displayed
(worst behavior) by some group members gives credit to the thesis that displaying individual
extractions and / or individual payoffs can worsen the tragedy of the commons making it faster
to appear (Villena & Zecchetto, 2011).

    With regard to the limitations and possible extensions of this chapter, it would have been
advisable, to study the effects of 1) a complete information (displaying individuals payoffs), 2) an
injunctive norm, with information reflecting social expectations of behavior, on group dynamics
in the context of a common pool resource management.

    Regarding the effect of delivering complete information, Weimann (1994) considers that it
does not affect contributions in a public good context. Nevertheless, Bigoni and Suetens (2012)
refute this result showing that delivering complete information accelerates the collapse of co-
operation. High contributors tend to imitate the best payoffs. In an oligopoly Cournot market
experiment, Offerman et al. (2002) also show that delivering a complete information lead to
more competitive behaviors. Those results are in line with Villena and Zecchetto (2011), who
demonstrate that in a common pool context delivering complete information can worsen com-
mon tragedy, accelerating it. It would have been interesting to analyze whether we obtain the
same result as Villena and Zecchetto (2011) in our CPR context, which is characterized by de-
pendency on the resource. This analysis would have enabled us to disentangle the potentially
different effects of delivering i) aggregated extraction, ii) individual extractions, iii) a complete
information, on group dynamics. To achieve such objectives, it might be interesting to introduce
these different treatments since the first sequence of the experiment. Indeed, Croson (1995) ’s
experiment has shown that differences in behavior between treatment where aggregated or in-
dividuals’ information are displayed can take time to appear. To finish, going a step forward in
increasing our knowledge on the motives of self-governance, it would have been interesting to
analyze if delivering complete information in a common pool context could impact the efficiency
of peer punishment. The starting point for this questioning comes from the experiment of Ni-
kiforakis (2010). In this article, he compared three treatments regarding the feedback delivered
to subjects : i) others’ contributions, ii) others’ earnings and iii) both, and concluded that peer
punishment is less efficient when subjects get the individuals’ earnings of their peers and espe-
cially when they get the two kinds of information. Doing the proposed treatments would have
allowed us to determine whether the effectiveness of peer punishment is affected by the type of
social information feedback provided in a common pool resource context.

   There is evidence that the disclosing of information about the average behavior, also called the
descriptive norm, generally leads to convergence of behavior towards it (Ferraro & Price, 2013 ;
Schultz, 1999 ; Schultz et al., 2007). Moreover, it should be highlighted that when the feedbacks


                                                260


                                        General conclusion




about others’ actions are manipulated, they strongly influence group dynamic (Fleishman, 1988 ;
Weimann, 1994 ; Frey & Meier, 2004 ; Croson & Shang, 2008). Subjects are more likely to have a
high level of contribution when they are told that others do so, confirming a willingness to conform
to the social norm. Schultz et al. (2007) also show that the addition of a symbol which signals
to subjects if they have a good or bad behavior regarding social expectation (injunctive social
norm), enables to avoid the "Boomerang effect". It would have been interesting to investigate how
this nudge may impact behaviors in a common pool context. More widely, it would be interesting
to keep on investigating how manipulating social information, for example, by delivering only
information about the most virtuous behaviors, impacts subjects’ behaviors.

    Finally, another research path could be to investigate how these different formats of social
information influence behavior according to the social orientations of the subjects. These re-
searches might enable us to identify better what can shatter group’ dynamics. We will develop
this aspect more in details in the last part of this discussion.



Chapter 2 and 3 results and perspectives from the literature :

    Chapters 2 and 3 show that the way to present a collective action issue, by making salient
the potential positive vs negative externalities of the social interaction ceteris paribus, influences
the willingness to cooperate. Considering all data that composed those chapters 2 and 3, we
partly replicate Andreoni (1995b) ’s result. Subjects are more willing to contribute to a public
good when they perceive that they are doing good ("warm glow") compared to case where they
perceive that they are doing bad ("cold prickle"). Nevertheless, the framing effect is strongly
dependent on groups’ inherent capacity to cooperate, and that is why, as in the give and take
frame, this effect is fragile.

    The introduction of disapproval ratings, symbolic or materials, enable contributions to the
public good to significantly increase compared to Baseline conditions. For the two kinds of
sanctions, the determinants of punishment are similar in both frames ; they are mostly driven
by comparison to peers’ contributions. The less a subject contributes compared to his peers, the
more he will be disapproved. Nevertheless, the number of symbolic and monetary sanctions sent
are slightly higher in the negative frame. This higher number of sanctions sent is related to a
greater dispersion of contributions within the groups.

    More interestingly, we find that when monetary sanctions are introduced after a sequence
in which subjects were unable to express their disapproval, the frame strongly influences the
ability of the group to reach a high level of contribution. The different reaction to sanctions
introduction is observed since the first period after their introduction. In the positive frame, a
substantial percentage (34 %) of subjects decide to fully contribute, and this percentage keeps
on increasing until the last period. Whereas, in the negative frame, the percentage is lower (22
%) and it remains constant. Paradoxically, the number of sanctions sent is higher in the negative
frame.

    When we try to go further in our understanding of how the frame impacts behavior, it results
that it impacts perception and the stated willingness to reciprocate to others’ actions. In our
experiment, we demonstrate that negative frame of Andreoni (1995b) makes it more difficult
for subjects to figure out the payoffs. We make the conjecture that this difficulty participates
in the negative perception of the actions of their peers that they obtain through this framing.


                                                 261


                                        General conclusion




Nevertheless, the framing effect cannot be reduced to a lower understanding of economic in-
centives. It seems important to remind that even in the negative frame, a majority of subjects
declare that they would fully contribute if others do so, whereas we never observe such a percen-
tage in groups dynamic. As a consequence, other interesting results is that subjects willingness
to cooperate depends on others’ contributions, confirming that a majority can be qualified as
conditional cooperators, as Fischbacher et al. (2001) showed. Though, it is worth noticing that
the percentage of subjects who declared that they will fully contribute if others do so is also
affected by the frame. Unconditional free riders are slightly more numerous when the potential
negative externalities of social interaction are highlighted (Fosgaard et al., 2014 ; Gächter et al.,
2017 ; Gächter et al., Forthcoming). We confirm this result in our experiment.

     Additionally, another interesting result, which was initially found by Park (2000), is that the
frame seems to affect more strongly subjects who have an individualist social orientation. In the
first sequence in Baseline conditions, Individualistic subjects have a lower contribution under the
negative frame, whereas we do not observe such a difference for prosocial subjects. Moreover, their
stated conditional cooperation is more strongly affected by the frame, as they are significantly
less willing to fully contribute under the negative frame. Finally, they are the ones who react
differently to the introduction of sanctions in the negative frame as they are less willing to imitate
the best behavior displayed. To sum up, how the issue of collective action is presented and
perceived strongly affects group dynamics. When monetary sanctions are introduced, negative
framing strongly restricts the ability of groups to converge towards a full contribution, while the
number of prosocially oriented subjects is equivalent in both frameworks. Therefore, the number
of subjects willing to bear the cost of cooperation should be the same.

    As far as limitations and possible extensions are concerned, we could have better determined
the effects of framing, if our database was drained of groups that cooperate fully without any
mechanism, even though they are mainly composed of individualistic subjects. These results
are particularly odd and questioning. Also, to better understand how the frame affects group
dynamics, it would be interesting to display individual actions in the Baseline conditions. This
would also increase the comparison with treatments in which disapproval ratings are introduced
and for which individual actions are displayed. Furthermore, to improve our understanding of
the effects of framing, it would be necessary to elicit subjects’ beliefs about the actions of others.
Framing has been shown to have a consistent effect on beliefs (Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ; Fosgaard
et al., 2014 ; Gächter et al., 2017). Moreover, if we consider, as our learning analysis tends to
confirm it, that subjects conform to others’ action and in a lesser extent best reply to them ; then
their belief about others’ actions must strongly influence their behaviors. More investigations are
needed to better understand how the frame may affect the expected or reprehensible behavior
(Kahneman, 1992). Integrating the judgment test as defined by Cubitt et al. (2011) in Andreoni
(1995b)’s experiment, could be a lead. To finish, it would be interesting to further investigate how
the framing affects behavior depending on subjects’ types. Doing so, we will have more insights
to confirm that individualistic subjects are particularly sensitive to the change of perception
created by the frame. This brings us to the common questions arising from the lines of inquiry
developed in this thesis.



Common questions and proposed extensions :

    In this last part, we will discuss the common findings resulting from the three chapters of
this thesis. Namely, the effect of social preferences in collective action and how they influence


                                                 262


                                         General conclusion




the way subjects react to the information displayed. For each of them, we confront them to the
literature, and finally, we propose further paths of investigations.


Conditional cooperation, conformity and social preferences as drivers of the
group’s dynamic

    A common result which appears from those three chapters is that the behavior of the majority
of subjects depends strongly on the behavior of their peers. That is why they can be qualified as
conditional cooperators (Fischbacher et al., 2001). A recent comparative study shows that this
behavioral pattern is replicable and therefore, a consistent result (Thöni & Volk, 2018). This
behavior can be qualified as a taste of conformity because subjects conform to others’ actions.
Our learning analysis also shows that in both, common-pool resource and public good issues, the
taste of conformity (i.e. the imitation the average action), is a reliable driver of group dynamics.

    Furthermore, our results also make salient that social preferences are an important driver
of collective action issues. Subjects with prosocial preferences are more likely to cooperate in
both common pool and public good issues. Those results are in line with both experimental and
theoretical results, which pledge for the consideration of social preferences as an important driver
for group dynamics. Fischbacher and Gächter (2010), in a public experiment conducted under
stranger conditions, demonstrate that (i) the type of subjects, defined by their willingness to
contribute depending on the contributions of others (Fischbacher et al., 2001) ; and (ii) the fact
that subjects update their beliefs about the actions of others in a non-naïve way, explain the
observed decrease in contributions. In other words, taking into account how different subjects
declare that they will react (reciprocate) to the actions of others and how they update their
beliefs, helps to explain group dynamics when there is no mechanism to foster cooperation.
Ambrus and Pathak (2011) propose to explain the initial contribution and their progressive
decrease through the heterogeneity of the subjects’ social preferences.

    These findings raise the question of the potential link between social preferences and the taste
for conformity. More specifically : Is the willingness to conform to the social norm a result of social
preferences or the reverse ? This point calls for much more evidence before being able to state an
explanation. Considering our results, we will be tempted to give credit to the arguments developed
by Fehr and Williams (2018). They state that the will to conform, the norm of conditional
cooperation, cannot explain : i) the will to punish free-riders ii) the preferences for a context that
allows peer punishment. That is why they consider that "norm compliance arises if individuals
have an intrinsic desire for equity or fairness". Our learning analysis shows that when individuals’
extractions are displayed, prosocial individuals have a higher tendency to continue to conform
to the average extraction displayed and in a lesser extent to best reply to it. This behavior
is consistent with the imperfect conditional cooperation behavior. Conversely, individualistic
subjects have a higher tendency to imitate the worst extraction displayed, and they seem more
sensitive to perception bias in the way they react to peer pressure.

    Based on these results, we consider that more attention should be given on how social prefe-
rences can explain group dynamics. More particularly, if we consider that a substantial percentage
of subjects is driven by a desire or fairness and conformity ; the following question arises : "How
can we build institutions that regulate the actions of less prosocial individuals ?" Besides the
actions that change monetary incentives, it would be interesting to go further in the investiga-
tion on the effect of non-monetary incentives and more particularly information effects such as
complete information or injunctive norm.

                                                 263


                                        General conclusion




Information details, heuristics and subjects’ type

    As our computational capacity is limited, we can make the hypothesis that giving more infor-
mation about the structure of the game can change the behavior. Some will say that Apesteguia
(2006), seems to contradict this rule, as he considers that giving or not giving information about
winnings leads subjects to reach Nash’s equilibrium in all cases. Nevertheless, the information
he delivers in his two treatments is limited. In one case, there is no information at all and, in the
other case, there is a basic description of the payoff function and some illustrations. He is not
delivering the payoff structure, i.e. the details about how their earnings will change according to
their actions but also the actions of others.

    Besides, Saijo and Nakamura (1995) show that when subjects have relatively low information
about the payoff structure, they are more likely to be spiteful. It means that they are less willing
to contribute even when it is a dominant strategy. Instead, they are more sensitive to social
comparison (the ranking among them). Additionally, Ramalingam et al. (2018) recently demons-
trated that in a VCM, shorter instructions lead to a lower contribution level and a relatively
higher level of punishment. Those are important results, as in real life, cases in which subjects
can have in mind the full payoff matrix are rare. So we have to take into consideration that, in
most of the situations, people are likely to be more spiteful and paying more attention to social
comparison than what theory predicts. This sensitivity to social comparison is corroborated by
the experiment of Andreoni (1995a), who shows that adding information on the subject’s ranking
in a VCM reduces the subjects’ contributions. In other words, when they have information that
explicitly makes a social comparison, they are less likely to cooperate.

    In another experiment, Huck et al. (2017) show that in a complete information situation, the
fact to enable subjects to calculate what would have been their payoffs in the previous period for
alternative choices leads to less cooperative behaviors. For these results, we consider that more
attention should be paid to the format in which the information is provided (whether or not to
add the earnings matrix, whether or not to allow subjects to calculate their earnings). It will
allow us to better understand what type of information can reduce the "spite effect" or, on the
contrary, make subjects less cooperative.

    Moreover, we consider that these results reinforce the intuition that the provision of social
information can have a significant impact on behavior ; and that it is useful to deepen our
understanding trying to disentangle its effects. It would be interesting to better figure out how
the different types of information (aggregated, individual actions, complete information and
the addition of an injunctive dimension) influence the subjects’ willingness to cooperate by
distinguishing them by their social orientation. A field experiment shows that manipulating the
aggregated information might mainly affect the behavior of subjects that could be qualified as
conditional cooperators (Frey & Meier, 2004). Further investigations need to be conducted to
understand how different types of subjects react to various kind of information that might modify
their perceptions about others’ action. To this end, continuing to study learning analysis to better
study subject heuristics may be an interesting line of research.


Further investigation paths to characterize a given context.

    Cultural contexts strongly influence social preferences. Through a cross-cultural study, Hen-
rich et al. (2004), demonstrated that social preferences (measured via dictator and ultimatum


                                                264


                                         General conclusion




games) reflect people connection through a market and their social dependency. Whalers, whose
survival depends on others, had the highest social preferences ; while isolated hunter-gatherers
had the lowest. Moreover, Andersen et al. (2008) show that the cultural context could have a
strong influence on the contribution behavior in a voluntary contribution mechanism. They ob-
serve a significantly lower percentage of free riders in Matrilineal society. This difference is mainly
driven by men, who are more cooperative in a matrilineal society. Another interesting result is
that the context influences subjects’ sensitivity to the way the collective action issue is framed.
In nonmatrilineal societies, subjects’ contributions are lower in the negative frame as defined
by Andreoni (1995b). While there is no difference in contribution between the two framing for
matrilineal societies. Besides these extreme cases, this study calls for a better understanding of
how the cultural context shape social preferences and so subjects willingness to reciprocate. As
we showed, social preferences might be important elements to take into consideration as they
can influence how subjects react and use social information.

     Moreover, it seems important to better figure out the perceptions people have about the
collective action issue they are facing and of others’ action effect. These perceptions might impact
their willingness to cooperate and the regulatory mechanisms they are in favor of (Alesina et
al., 2018). Also, perceptions might have an impact on how they respond to peer pressure or
peer punishment. We demonstrate that the perception created by the frame can impact the way
subjects react to peer punishment. More widely, Nikiforakis (2010) demonstrated that the kind of
information delivered concerning others’ actions also has an important influence on the efficiency
of peer punishment. It is worth noticing that these different effects due to different perception or
social information displayed do not always appear when there are no mechanisms that may foster
cooperation, but they clearly appear when they are introduced. As a consequence, investigations
are needed to better understand how, in a given context, subjects perceive the functioning of the
collective action issue they are facing, others’ actions effects and what they consider to be the
sustainable and acceptable behavior.

    Additionally, in most of the common pool or public good real situations, people are heteroge-
neous regarding their endowment and production functions. More has to be understood regarding
how this heterogeneity might affect collective action issue, through : i) their perception of others’
actions effects, ii) their willingness to cooperate, iii) the way they define the acceptable behavior
and iv) their reaction to social information. Indeed, there is heavy reason to think that this
heterogeneity might make the definition of a sustainable and acceptable behavior more com-
plex. Finally, in most concrete actions issues regarding natural resource management, subjects
are facing risk and uncertainty, which impact their payoffs. More investigations are needed to
better understand how these aspects might impact group dynamic, and more particularly, how
they might interact with social information delivered. Social information might change subjects’
beliefs about others’ actions, and what they perceive to be the desirable behavior, thereby rein-
forcing the social norm. Cialdini et al. (1990) defined norms as : « sets of beliefs about what other
people are doing or what they approve or disapprove of doing». Moreover, several experiments
show that the more subjects trust others, the more they are likely to adapt their behavior in
case of resource variation and uncertainty regarding this latter (Brann & Foddy, 1987 ; Baggio
et al., 2015). These results call for more investigations regarding how different informational
systems might help to manage natural resources, in a global context where risk and uncertainty
will increase due to climate change.

    To conclude, this thesis provides new evidence that delivering social information and the way
the collective action is presented, and so perceived through the way it is framed, impact groups
capacity to cooperate. Moreover, it also sheds light on the fact that social preferences are im-


                                                 265


                                       General conclusion




portant drivers of group dynamics, bringing explanations of why delivering detailed information
about subjects’ actions can worsen the tragedy of the commons. It invites us to develop fur-
ther investigations on how different kinds of social information such as a complete information,
adding injunctive norm, ranking or more detailed information about the payoff might promote
virtuous behaviors or at the contrary increase the competitive ones. Considering that most of
the subjects are conditional cooperators, this findings will help to better identify what type of
information (in nudges) leads to cooperative behaviors. Finally, this may enable to identify what
kind of social information could be provided to strengthen the trust, and thus the social capital,
of resource-dependent groups.




                                               266


                                        General conclusion




References

   ALESINA, A., STANTCHEVA, S. & TESO, E. 2018. Intergenerational mobility and prefe-
rences for redistribution. American Economic Review, 108, 521-54.

   AMBRUS, A. & PATHAK, P. A. 2011. Cooperation over finite horizons : A theory and
experiments. Journal of Public Economics, 95, 500-512.

    ANDERSEN, S., BULTE, E., GNEEZY, U. & LIST, J. A. 2008. Do women supply more
public goods than men ? Preliminary experimental evidence from matrilineal and patriarchal
societies. American Economic Review, 98, 376-81.

   ANDREONI, J. 1995a. Cooperation in Public-Goods Experiments : Kindness or Confusion ?
The American Economic Review, 85, 891-904.

   ANDREONI, J. 1995b. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : the effects of positive and negative
framing on cooperation in experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1-21.

   APESTEGUIA, J. 2006. Does information matter in the commons ? : Experimental evidence.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 60, 55-69.

    BAGGIO, J. A., ROLLINS, N. D., PÉREZ, I. & JANSSEN, M. A. 2015. Irrigation experi-
ments in the lab : trust, environmental variability, and collective action. Ecology and Society, 20,
12.

   BIGONI, M. & SUETENS, S. 2012. Feedback and dynamics in public good experiments.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 82, 86-95.

    BRANN, P. & FODDY, M. 1987. Trust and the consumption of a deteriorating common
resource. Journal of conflict resolution, 31, 615-630.

   CIALDINI, R. B., RENO, R. R. & KALLGREN, C. A. 1990. A focus theory of normative
conduct : recycling the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 58, 1015.

   COUNCIL, N. R. 2002. New Tools for Environmental Protection : Education, Information,
and Voluntary Measures, Washington, DC, The National Academies Press.

   COX, C. A. & STODDARD, B. 2015. Framing and feedback in social dilemmas with partners
and strangers. Games, 6, 394-412.

   CROSON, R. 1995. Feedback in voluntary contributions mechanismes : An experiment in
team production Discussion Paper, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

   CROSON, R. & SHANG, J. Y. 2008. The impact of downward social information on contri-
bution decisions. Experimental Economics, 11, 221-233.

    CUBITT, R. P., DROUVELIS, M., GÄCHTER, S. & KABALIN, R. 2011. Moral judgments
in social dilemmas : How bad is free riding ? Journal of Public Economics, 95, 253-264.


                                                267


                                      General conclusion




   DUFWENBERG, M., GÄCHTER, S. & HENNIG-SCHMIDT, H. 2011. The framing of games
and the psychology of play. Games and Economic Behavior, 73, 459-478.

   FEHR, E. & WILLIAMS, T. 2018. Social norms, endogenous sorting and the culture of
cooperation.

    FERRARO, P. J. & PRICE, M. K. 2013. Using nonpecuniary strategies to influence behavior :
evidence from a large-scale field experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 64-73.

    FISCHBACHER, U. & GÄCHTER, S. 2010. Social Preferences, Beliefs, and the Dynamics
of Free Riding in Public Goods Experiments. The American Economic Review, 100, 541-556.

    FISCHBACHER, U., GÄCHTER, S. & FEHR, E. 2001. Are people conditionally coopera-
tive ? Evidence from a public goods experiment. Economics letters, 71, 397-404.

    FLEISHMAN, J. A. 1988. The Effects of Decision Framing and Others’ Behavior on Coope-
ration in a Social Dilemma. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 32, 162-180.

    FOSGAARD, T. R., HANSEN, L. G. & WENGSTRÖM, E. 2014. Understanding the nature
of cooperation variability. Journal of Public Economics, 120, 134-143.

   FREY, B. S. & MEIER, S. 2004. Social comparisons and pro-social behavior : Testing"
conditional cooperation" in a field experiment. American Economic Review, 94, 1717-1722.

    GÄCHTER, S., KOELLE, F. & QUERCIA, S. 2017. Reciprocity and the tragedies of main-
taining and providing the commons Nature Human Behaviour. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9),
650-656.

    HENRICH, J., BOYD, R., BOWLES, S., CAMERER, C., FEHR, E. & GINTIS, H. 2004.
Foundations of Human Sociality-Economic Experiments and Ethnographic : Evidence From Fif-
teen Small-Scale Societies.

   HUCK, S., LEUTGEB, J. & OPREA, R. 2017. Payoff information hampers the evolution of
cooperation. Nature communications, 8, 15147.

   KAHNEMAN, D. 1992. Reference points, anchors, norms, and mixed feelings. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51, 296-312.

   MOXNES, E. 1998. Overexploitation of renewable resources : The role of misperceptions.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 37, 107-127.

  NIKIFORAKIS, N. 2010. Feedback, punishment and cooperation in public good experiments.
Games and Economic Behavior, 68, 689-702.

    PARK, E.-S. 2000. Warm-glow versus cold-prickle : a further experimental study of framing
effects on free-riding. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 43, 405-421.

    RAMALINGAM, A., MORALES, A. J. & WALKER, J. M. 2018. Varying experimental
instructions to improve comprehension : punishment in public goods games. Journal of behavioral
and experimental economics, 73, 66-73.


                                             268


                                      General conclusion




   SAIJO, T. & NAKAMURA, H. 1995. The “Spite” Dilemma in Voluntary Contribution Me-
chanism Experiments. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 39, 535-560.

   SCHULTZ, P. W. 1999. Changing behavior with normative feedback interventions : A field
experiment on curbside recycling. Basic and applied social psychology, 21, 25-36.

    SCHULTZ, P. W., NOLAN, J. M., CIALDINI, R. B., GOLDSTEIN, N. J. & GRISKEVI-
CIUS, V. 2007. The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psycho-
logical science, 18, 429-434.

    THÖNI, C. & VOLK, S. 2018. Conditional cooperation : Review and refinement. Economics
Letters, 171, 37-40.

    VILLENA, M. G. & ZECCHETTO, F. 2011. Subject-specific performance information can
worsen the tragedy of the commons : Experimental evidence. Journal of Economic Psychology,
32, 330-347.

   WEIMANN, J. 1994. Individual behaviour in a free riding experiment. Journal of Public
Economics, 54, 185-200.




                                             269


General conclusion




       270


                                                                Traductions en français




   Introduction générale
    La plupart des ressources naturelles sont surexploitées et leur gouvernance nécessite la mise
en place d’une action collective. Cependant, comment promouvoir et maintenir l’action collective
est l’une des questions économiques les plus débattues. Dans un contexte de production d’un bien
public tout comme dans la gestion d’une ressource commune, lorsque l’intérêt individuel entre en
conflit avec l’intérêt collectif, la coopération survient difficilement. L’individu est incité à ne pas
supporter le coût de la contribution, ou à en extraire le plus possible, alors que l’intérêt du groupe
est de réguler le comportement afin de fournir et de maintenir la ressource. En conséquence, cela
conduit théoriquement à une sous-provision dans le cas d’un bien public (Olson, 2009), et la
surexploitation de la ressource commune, également connue sous le nom de "tragédie des biens
communs" dans le cas de la gestion d’une ressource commune (Hardin, 1968).

     Réfutant ces conclusions, Ostrom (1990), dans son travail séminal, démontre que les groupes
locaux sont capables de gérer durablement des ressources communes sans une définition stricte
de la propriété ou du contrôle de l’État. Sur la base de ce travail, elle a identifié huit principes de
gouvernance qui permettent d’éviter la tragédie des biens communs : (i) une définition claire des
limites du groupe, (ii) une répartition proportionnelle des coûts et des bénéfices, (iii) des arran-
gements établis sur une base collective, (iv) la mise en place d’un système de surveillance et de
contrôle, (v) l’établissement de sanctions graduées, (vi) l’existence d’un mécanisme de règlement
des différends à bas coûts, (vii) la reconnaissance du droit d’organisation, (viii) l’application de
ces règles à des échelles multiples (entreprises imbriquées). Allant plus loin dans les recherches
sur la manière dont les aspects comportementaux pourraient expliquer pourquoi les groupes
réussissent ou échouent à coopérer, elle a été une pionnière dans l’utilisation de l’économie ex-
périmentale pour étudier ces aspects. Grâce à ses travaux, elle a démontré que des mécanismes
qui ne devraient pas avoir d’incidence sur la dynamique de groupe, tels que la communication
("cheap talk"), permettent aux groupes de générer et de maintenir la coopération (Ostrom et
al., 1994). Dans la continuité de ces travaux, les progrès de l’économie comportementale et ex-
périmentale révèlent que d’autres mécanismes sont également efficaces pour générer et maintenir
la coopération, tels que : les sanctions monétaires (Fehr et Gächter, 2000), les sanctions symbo-
liques (Masclet et al., 2003) et la récompense (Sefton et al., 2007). Ces mécanismes sont basés
sur l’expression de l’approbation ou de la désapprobation des actions d’autrui et ne devraient
pas avoir d’impact sur le comportement si nous avons une interprétation restrictive de l’intérêt

                                                 271


économique. Néanmoins, ils sont présents dans la plupart des fonctions de groupe.

     Poursuivant les travaux d’Ostrom, Dietz et al. (2003) considèrent que pour parvenir à une
gouvernance efficace, il est, entre autres, nécessaire, que i) les informations sur les ressources
et les actions des utilisateurs soient disponibles à un faible prix ; et ii) les communautés main-
tiennent une communication fréquente et un réseau social dense (capital social). La question de
l’effet de ces dimensions sur la capacité effective des communautés à maintenir une ressource est
très actuelle et de première importance. Institutions impliquées dans la gestion des ressources
mettent progressivement en place des systèmes qui délivrent des informations sur les actions des
utilisateurs et l’état des ressources afin de faciliter leur gouvernance.

    Par exemple, en termes de gestion de l’eau, la Compagnie d’Aménagement des Coteaux de
Gascogne (CACG), qui est un organisme qui distribue de l’eau aux agriculteurs pour l’irrigation,
a mis en place un système connecté conçu pour mieux identifier la consommation réelle de leurs
utilisateurs (et leur calendrier) et ainsi optimiser leur gestion. En effet, dans le cadre de la loi
sur l’eau de 2006 et du décret d’août 2007, la CACG doit veiller à ce que les engagements
pris pour atteindre un bon état écologique des cours d’eau soient respectés. A ce titre, elle doit
veiller au maintien d’un débit minimum ("Débit Objectif d’Etiage" et a fortiori un "Débit de
Crise") dans les milieux impactés par les prélèvements dédiés à l’irrigation. La mise en place
de compteurs télérelevés permet d’obtenir des informations plus précises (quotidiennes) sur les
besoins (retraits réels) des agriculteurs et leurs temporalités. Ces informations doivent permettre
à l’entreprise mieux gérer les prélèvements dans ses différents réservoirs d’eau. En effet, si les
lâchers ne correspondent pas aux besoins, l’eau fournie n’est pas utilisée par les agriculteurs et
n’est donc pas facturée. En outre, cette eau non utilisée est rendue au milieu. Elle n’est plus
distribuable ce qui risque de générer une pénurie à la fin de la saison agricole, lorsque le manque
d’eau se fait généralement plus ressentir. La fonction initiale du système est ici de faciliter la
coordination entre les actions du gestionnaire et celles des agriculteurs. La mise en œuvre de ce
système et son acceptation a été fortement influencée par les différents niveaux de pression sur la
ressource. C’est un instrument qui contribue à la création d’une nouvelle relation entre l’eau et
la société (Burger-Leenhardt et al., 2018 ; Collard et al., 2019). En effet, il a également été utilisé
pour diffuser des informations sociales, en affichant le taux moyen de consommation d’eau.

    Un autre exemple est la mise en place d’une plateforme d’information appelée Système d’In-
formation sur l’Eau du Marais Poitevin (SIEMP) par l’Etablissement public de l’eau et de la
biodiversité sur le Marais Poitevin (EPMP). L’EPMP est un établissement public dont la mis-
sion est de coordonner la gestion de l’espace géographique appelé Marais Poitevin. Il a été créé
suite à la condamnation de la France par l’Europe en raison de la dégradation de l’environne-
ment en 1999 (non respect de la Directive Oiseaux). Cette dégradation a été générée par un
fort développement de l’irrigation dans cette zone, qui est maintenant identifiée comme générant
une forte tension sur la ressource en eau (Zones de Répartition des Eaux (ZRE)). Cette zone
se caractérise par une forte diversité des acteurs impliqués dans la gestion de l’environnement
(associations de protection de la nature, pêcheurs, associations de syndicats de marais, services
de l’Etat, collectivités locales, etc). Le système d’information SIEMP fournit des informations
sur l’état de la ressource mais aussi sur les prélèvements collectifs actuels des agriculteurs à tous
les acteurs concernés ; il est divisé en deux parties. Le premier système est dédié au grand public
et fournit des informations sur l’état des ressources. Il a pour objectif de permettre une meilleure
compréhension du fonctionnement du Marais Poitevin et ainsi de créer un climat de confiance
et de faciliter le dialogue entre les différents acteurs concernés. La deuxième partie est consacrée
aux acteurs impliqués dans l’établissement des règles de gestion. Ce second système leur permet
surveiller les niveaux d’extraction réels du groupe d’agriculteurs.


                                                 272


    De nombreux questionnements émergent du fait de la mise en œuvre de ce type de systèmes
d’information. Par exemple, le fait de fournir des informations sur les actions d’autres utilisateurs
facilitera-t-il la gestion d’une ressource ? De nombreuses questions se posent également sur la
forme, le niveau de détail et la manière dont ces informations doivent être fournies et sur leurs
effets. Comment ces informations seront-elles utilisées par l’individu ? Ces informations peuvent-
elles modifier ses comportements ? En d’autres termes, ces informations peuvent-elles favoriser
l’émergence d’une norme de coopération, ou au contraire la rendre plus difficile ? De plus, quelle
peut être l’influence de la perception des sujets de l’effet des actions des autres sur la capacité du
groupe à coopérer ? Cette interrogation découle des résultats d’Andreoni (1995b), qui souligne
que les sujets sont plus disposés à coopérer lorsqu’ils perçoivent les actions des autres comme
ayant des effets positifs que lorsqu’ils les perçoivent comme ayant des aspects négatifs. Enfin, dans
quelle mesure cette perception, créée par les informations fournies dans le framing d’Andreoni,
peut interagir avec la capacité du groupe à coopérer ?

    Cette thèse vise à apporter de nouvelles perspectives concernant les effets de la fourniture
d’informations sur les actions des utilisateurs sur la gestion des ressources naturelles, dans des
contextes de ressource commune et de bien public. Nous concentrons plus particulièrement notre
étude sur l’effet de l’information sur les actions des pairs et leurs effets potentiels sur la dynamique
de groupe. Nous analysons d’abord l’effet de l’affichage d’informations sociales selon différentes
modalités sur la dynamique de groupe. Dans une deuxième partie, nous examinons l’effet de la
perception que les sujets ont des actions des autres sur la dynamique de groupe en présentant
les actions de leurs pairs comme ayant des externalités potentielles positives ou négatives. Dans
cette partie, nous analysons plus particulièrement comment l’effet de framing interagit avec les
mécanismes qui sont fréquents dans les dynamiques de groupe, tels que la pression des pairs
et la punition des pairs. L’effet de l’interaction du framing avec ces deux mécanismes compose
respectivement nos chapitres 2 et 3. De plus, à travers toute la thèse, nous essayons d’analyser
comment les préférences sociales affectent la sensibilité des sujets à l’information sociale. Les
questions soulevées par ces trois aspects seront présentées plus en détail dans les paragraphes
suivants.



Information sociale

   Nous considérons que la non-exclusivité et la rivalité sont à la source de la plupart des
problèmes liés à la gestion des ressources naturelles. En conséquence, nous choisissons dans
notre premier chapitre un jeu qui représente une ressource commune. Nous adoptons pour notre
analyse le protocole établi par Herr et al. (1997) qui représente une gestion des eaux souterraines.
Ce chapitre est consacré à l’analyse de l’effet de l’information sociale. Plus précisément, nous
analysons l’effet d’afficher les actions des individus sur la dynamique de groupe.

    Dans son cadre conceptuel comportemental, Ostrom (1998) affirme que la diffusion d’in-
formations sur l’action des autres membres du groupe est nécessaire pour établir confiance et
réputation. Elle considère comme des facteurs déterminants pour le succès de la coopération du
groupe. Cependant, de nombreux travaux de terrain ont montré que la diffusion d’informations
sur les actions des autres utilisateurs, loin de générer une augmentation de la coopération, induit
une convergence des comportements vers le comportement moyen affiché (Schultz, 1999 ; Schultz
et al., 2007 ; Croson & Shang, 2008 ; Ferraro & Price, 2013). Des travaux expérimentaux dé-
montrent également que l’affichage d’actions individuelles, ou de gains individuels (informations
complètes), peut aggraver l’action collective, car les sujets sont plus tentés d’imiter le compor-


                                                  273


tement le plus compétitif affiché (Carpenter, 2004 ; Offerman et al., 2002 ; Villena & Zecchetto,
2011 ; Bigoni & Suetens,2012).

    Afin d’éclairer la question de l’effet des informations sociales sur la gestion des ressources com-
munes, et plus précisément sur l’effet de l’affichage des actions des individus, nous comparons
des traitements dans lesquels seule l’extraction agrégée du groupe est affichée avec un traitement
dans lequel les extractions individuelles sont affichées. En outre, nous analysons l’effet de diffé-
rentes modalités dans la manière de fournir des informations sociales. Kreitmair (2015) soutient
que la dimension volontaire de la divulgation d’informations peut jouer un rôle important dans
la volonté de coopérer. Dans son expérience sur la contribution au bien public, elle propose un
mécanisme qui permet aux sujets de signaler leur volonté de rendre publique leur propre action
avant de faire leurs choix. De plus, comme le montre l’expérience de Chaudhuri et Paichayont-
vijit (2006), les sujets contribuent davantage lorsqu’ils sont informés qu’une majorité de sujets
de leur groupe sont prêts à le faire. Nous décidons donc d’ajouter une dimension majoritaire
dans ce mécanisme de divulgation d’informations. Grâce à ces traitements, nous testons si la
dimension volontaire permet aux sujets de signaler leur volonté de coopérer. Ces traitements
nous permettent de fournir des résultats sur la manière dont la volonté d’afficher l’extraction des
sujets est liée à une volonté de coopérer en réduisant leurs extractions. En d’autres termes, ces
résultats nous permettent de mieux comprendre si la dimension volontaire est utilisée comme un
signal de la volonté de coopérer. Par ailleurs, ce travail nous permet de mieux connaître l’effet
d’avoir une majorité de sujets déclarant leur volonté de rendre leurs actions publiques sur la
capacité du groupe à coopérer.

    Enfin, nous analysons l’impact de la fourniture informations sociales en divulguant les actions
des individus sur la dynamique des groupes. Plus précisément, nous examinons si le fait de four-
nir des informations agrégées ou individuelles a un impact sur les stratégies d’extraction. Pour
ce faire, nous utilisons l’analyse de l’apprentissage telle que définie dans Huck et al. (1999), qui
détermine quelles stratégies expliquent le mieux les changements de contributions d’une période
à l’autre. Pour établir les différentes stratégies d’extraction, nous adaptons celles définies dans
Villena et Zecchetto (2011), qui est le premier article qui examine l’effet de l’apprentissage dans
un contexte de ressources communes. Le chapitre 1 donne des indications pour comprendre les
moteurs de la dynamique de groupe et comment le niveau d’agrégation concernant les infor-
mations sociales divulguées peut l’influencer. En d’autres termes, nous fournissons de nouveaux
résultats pour comprendre comment les sujets peuvent modifier leurs stratégies d’extraction en
fonction du type d’informations disponibles concernant les actions des autres.

    Dans la suite de la thèse, nous analysons une autre dimension des effets de la fourniture d’in-
formations sociales. Nous examinons comment les informations fournies pour décrire les questions
d’action collective et les effets des actions par les pairs ont un impact sur la coopération de groupe
et l’efficacité des mécanismes qui sont identifiés comme favorisant la coopération.



Présenter les actions des autres comme ayant des externalités po-
sitives ou négatives et des mécanismes de désapprobation

    De nombreuses expériences démontrent que la manière de présenter un problème d’action
collective influence fortement la coopération de groupe (Andreoni, 1995b ; Cox, 2015 ; Cubitt
et al., 2011a ; Cubitt et al., 2011b ; Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ; Fosgaard et al., 2014 ; Fujimoto
& Park, 2010 ; Messer et al., 2007 ; Messer et al., 2013 ; Gachter et al., 2017). Dans la plupart

                                                 274


des cas, les sujets sont plus disposés à contribuer lorsque l’interaction sociale est décrite comme
ayant des externalités positives plutôt que négatives. Dans son expérience, Andreoni (1995b)
démontre que les sujets sont plus disposés à coopérer lorsqu’ils perçoivent qu’ils font du bien que
lorsqu’ils perçoivent qu’ils font du mal. Il conclut que l’effet du "warm glow" est plus efficace
pour promouvoir la coopération que l’effet "cold prickle". Nous analysons si cette perception peut
interagir avec les mécanismes qui sont présents dans la plupart des groupes et qui ont prouvé
leur efficacité pour favoriser la coopération : la désapprobation par les pairs.

    Par désapprobation des pairs, nous entendons un mécanisme qui permet aux sujets d’expri-
mer leur insatisfaction/ désaccord avec les actions d’autres individus de leur groupe (leurs pairs).
La punition par les pairs (Fehr & Gächter, 2000 ; Ostrom et al., 1994) et la pression des pairs
(Masclet et al., 2003) ont démontré leur efficacité pour promouvoir et maintenir la coopération.
Considérant que les individus sont strictement égoïstes, ils ne devraient pas supporter le coût
de l’envoi de sanctions monétaires et ne devraient pas non plus modifier leur comportement
lorsqu’ils reçoivent la désapprobation symbolique d’autrui (pour les sanctions symboliques). Ce-
pendant, des preuves expérimentales démontrent que lorsque ces mécanismes sont introduits, la
majorité agit de manière coopérative alors que ce n’est pas le cas lorsqu’ils sont absents. Fehr
et Fischbacher (2004) affirment que les sanctions permettent d’activer une norme sociale de co-
opération. Néanmoins, l’expérience de Messer et al. (2013) montre que des mécanismes tels que
la communication et d’autres mécanismes de "cheap talk" sont moins efficaces dans un framing
qui met en évidence les aspects négatifs des interactions sociales. Dans les chapitres 2 et 3, nous
examinons si l’efficacité des mécanismes de désapprobation et la norme commune de coopération
qu’ils activent pourraient être affectés par le framing.

    Pour ce faire, nous reproduisons strictement les framings de l’expérience de contribution
volontaire créée par Andreoni (1995). Nous distinguons ainsi un framing positif qui met en évi-
dence l’externalité positive potentielle de l’interaction sociale et un framing négatif qui met en
évidence l’externalité négative potentielle de cette dernière. Pour ces deux framings, nous ajou-
tons la possibilité d’envoyer des sanctions symboliques au chapitre 2 et des sanctions monétaires
au chapitre 3 (entre les conditions). Nous contrôlons également l’effet d’ordre de ces mécanismes
de désapprobation en les introduisant dans la première séquence ou dans la deuxième séquence
en fonction du traitement.

    Ces deux chapitres fournissent de nouveaux résultats concernant l’effet de cadrage d’An-
dreoni sur la contribution des groupes et les facteurs qui peuvent expliquer sa fragilité. De plus,
nous apportons de nouvelles perspectives sur la robustesse des mécanismes de désapprobation
aux changements contextuels. Notre travail permet de mieux comprendre comment la mise en
évidence des externalités positives ou négatives de l’interaction sociale influe sur la volonté de
désapprobation, la réaction à la désapprobation et, par conséquent, sur la capacité du groupe à
définir une norme de contribution. Nous fournissons également de nouveaux résultats qui sont
cohérents avec ce qui est identifié comme les principaux effets du framing, à savoir la perception
(ou la mauvaise perception) et la réciprocité.

   Enfin, à travers toute cette thèse, nous analysons comment la préférence sociale des sujets
pourrait affecter leur réponse à l’information sociale.




                                                275


Préférences sociales

    Si la compréhension stratégique et la confusion sont des explications importantes de la co-
opération de groupe, Andreoni (1995a) nous invite également à considérer les préférences sociales
comme des moteurs importants de la dynamique de groupe. Dans cette thèse, nous analysons
tout d’abord comment les préférences sociales influencent la coopération tant au niveau des res-
sources communes que des biens publics. Pour ce faire, dans toutes les expériences présentées,
nous mesurons l’orientation des sujets vers les valeurs sociales à l’aide du test de Murphy et
al. (2011). Cela permet d’obtenir un score individuel d’orientation vers les valeurs sociales qui
reflète la préférence des sujets pour un partage, et donc d’analyser leur effet sur le comportement
coopératif.

    De plus, dans le contexte du bien public et de la ressource commune, nous mettons en lu-
mière la manière dont les préférences sociales interagissent avec les informations sociales. Plus
précisément, nous analysons comment les préférences sociales peuvent interagir avec la réaction
à la divulgation d’informations sur les actions d’autrui. Ensuite, nous analysons comment les
préférences sociales interagissent avec la façon dont la problématique d’action collective est pré-
sentée. En d’autres termes, l’orientation sociale des sujets influence-t-elle de manière positive ou
négative leur réaction à la présentation de l’action collective ? Dans cette réplique du framing
d’Andreoni (1995b), les incitations économiques restent strictement identiques.

    Dans le premier chapitre, nous développons un cadre théorique pour identifier comment les
préférences sociales telles que l’altruisme (Levine, 1997), la réciprocité (Sugden, 1984), l’aversion
pour l’inégalité (Fehr & Schmidt, 1999) ou le goût du conformisme (Luzzati, 1999) peuvent
influencer la manière dont les individus réagissent à la divulgation des actions d’autrui. En
même temps, nous effectuons une analyse de l’apprentissage afin de déterminer comment les
individus modifient réellement leurs stratégies en fonction des informations disponibles. De plus,
comme Bigoni et Suetens (2012), nous allons plus loin dans cette analyse de l’apprentissage en
distinguant différents types de sujets. La principale différence réside dans le fait que nous utilisons
les catégories définies par le test de Murphy et al.(2011) pour établir les différents types. Cette
analyse nous permet de fournir de nouvelles preuves sur la manière dont les préférences sociales
influencent la façon dont les sujets réagissent aux informations sur les actions des autres.

    Dans les chapitres 2 et 3, nous analysons comment les préférences sociales influencent la
volonté de réciprocité selon le framing. En effet, Park (2000) constate que les orientations des
valeurs sociales influencent la façon dont les sujets réagissent au framing. L’analyse globale des
chapitres 2 et 3 fournit des résultats concernant l’impact de l’orientation sociale sur la sensibilité
des sujets à un framing qui met en évidence les externalités positives et négatives potentielles des
interactions sociales. En outre, nous fournissons de nouveaux résultats qui permettent de mieux
comprendre comment ces préférences sociales influencent leurs volonté de réciprocité en fonction
du framing.

    Enfin, Fehr et Schmidt (1999) démontrent que, lorsque des sanctions matérielles sont appli-
quées, la pleine contribution au bien public peut être un équilibre. Nous fournissons des résultats
qui montrent qu’il peut être affecté par le framing. En d’autres termes, le chapitre 3 fournit des
résultats permettant de mieux comprendre comment le framing pourrait affecter la capacité du
groupe à converger vers la pleine contribution lorsque des sanctions matérielles sont appliquées.
Pour mieux comprendre ces résultats, nous analysons comment les sujets réagissent à l’intro-
duction des sanctions, en changeant leurs stratégies d’extraction, en distinguant les sujets en
fonction de leur valeur d’orientation sociale.

                                                 276


     En résumé, cette thèse contribue à la littérature en apportant des éléments sur l’impact de
l’information sociale sur la dynamique des groupes face aux dilemmes sociaux. Dans une première
partie, nous analysons les effets de la diffusion d’informations sociales sur l’extraction dans le
contexte d’une ressource commune. Dans une deuxième partie, nous analysons les effets d’un
cadrage mettant en évidence respectivement les effets positifs ou négatifs des actions des pairs
sur la contribution à un bien public. Pour chacune de ces deux parties, nous accordons une
attention particulière à la manière dont les préférences sociales influencent d’une part la volonté
de coopérer et d’autre part la réaction à l’information sur les actions des pairs et leurs effets.




                                               277


   Chapitre 1




                                               Résumé


La gestion d’une ressource naturelle, plus particulièrement d’une ressource en eau, renvoie le
plus souvent à une problématique de gestion d’une ressource commune. Dans ce cadre, Ostrom
(1998) et Dietz (2003) mettent en avant l’importance de diffuser des informations sur les actions
des co-usagers de façon à faciliter sa gouvernance. Néanmoins, nombre d’expériences montrent
que loin de faciliter la coopération, la diffusion d’information sociale a pour effets d’induire la
convergence vers le comportement moyen (Ferraro & Price, 2013 ; Schultz, 1999 ; Schultz et al.,
2007 ; Croson & Shang, 2008), ce qui peut accélérer la prédation de la ressource (Janssen, 2013 ;
Janssen et al., 2014 ; Villena & Zecchetto 2011).

    Dans cette expérience, nous cherchons à déterminer l’effet de la révélation d’informations
sociales sur l’extraction d’une ressource commune. Pour ce faire, nous reproduisons l’expérience
de Walker et al. (2000) qui décrit le fonctionnement d’une nappe phréatique, et nous testons les
effets de différents niveaux d’information sociale (agrégée, individuels) et différents mécanismes
de partage de cette dernière (volontaire, majoritaire ou obligatoire) (Kreitmair, 2015).

    Nous produisons également un cadre théorique pour déterminer comment, en raison des
différentes préférences sociales, la diffusion d’informations sociales peut induire différents effets de
sur la dynamique d’extraction. Enfin, nous étudions comment les différents niveaux d’information
fournis affectent les changements d’extraction effectifs en mobilisant les modèles d’apprentissage
tel que définis par (Huck et al., 1999 ; Bigoni & Suetens, 2012).

    Il ressort, au niveau agrégé, que les différents traitements donc les différents types d’informa-
tion sociale fournis n’améliorent pas la gestion de la ressource. L’ensemble des groupes abouti
à un niveau d’extractions proche de l’équilibre de Nash. Le cadre théorique fournit un élément
d’explication en montrant que lorsque les sujets ont des préférences pour la réciprocité ou pour la
conformité, cela peut induire une augmentation de l’extraction. L’analyse des modèles d’appren-
tissage confirme ce résultat en montrant que le goût pour la conformité ainsi qu’une best-reply
strictement individualiste sont des moteurs importants de la dynamique d’extraction. Ces ana-
lyses montrent également que lorsque l’ensemble des extractions individuelles sont affichées, les
individus ayant des orientations individualistes ou compétitives, estimées d’après le test de Mur-
phy et al. (2011) ont tendance à imiter les comportements les plus extractifs.

    Ces résultats montrent l’importance de la dynamique d’imitation et du goût pour la confor-
mité dans les dynamiques de groupes. Ils nous invitent à mieux prendre en compte les préférences
sociales pour comprendre les effets de la diffusion d’information sociale et plus précisément de
l’impact des différents types feedback sur la gestion des ressources naturelles.

   Mots clefs : ressource commune, information sociale, feedback, partage volontaire




                                                  278


   Chapitre 2




                                              Résumé


Andreoni (1995) a montré que des effets de framing peuvent influencer la contribution dans
les mécanismes de contribution volontaire (MCV) en comparant un jeu de biens publics appelé
condition de framing positive, avec une condition de framing négative. Les contributions au
compte de groupe (bien public) sont plus élevées lorsque l’interaction sociale leur est présentée
comme générant des externalités positives plutôt que négatives. Andreoni (1995) défend l’idée
que les sujets préfèrent faire du bien aux autres ("warm glow") que faire du mal ("cold prickle").

   Ce chapitre étudie si ces effets de framing influencent l’efficacité de mécanismes qui se sont
avérés favoriser la coopération, en particulier la pression exercée par les pairs. Il y a à ce jour
peu de connaissances sur ce sujet. Messer et al. 2013 ont démontré que l’efficacité de mécanismes
qualifiés de cheap talk tels que la communication et le vote est moindre lorsque le mécanisme de
contribution volontaire est présenté en utilisant un framing négatif. Notre expérience varie à la fois
du fait du framing utilisé mais également de la possibilité ou non d’envoyer des désapprobations
symboliques qui sont gratuites pour l’expéditeur et le destinataire.

    Nous n’avons pas reproduit les conclusions d’Andreoni dans cet ensemble de données. Cela
s’explique en partie par le fait trois groupes ont des niveaux de contributions significativement
plus élevés que les autres, et ce sans qu’aucun mécanisme favorisant la coopération soit mis
en place. Mais il en résulte également que l’effet du framing d’Andreoni est fragile et dépend
fortement de la volonté inhérente du groupe de coopérer. Néanmoins, nous avons constaté que le
framing a un impact sur la perception que les sujets ont des actions des autres ; ainsi que sur leur
réciprocité déclarée. Ces deux éléments sont moins élevés dans le framing négatif. Ces résultats
nous amènent à considérer avec plus d’attention la perception que les utilisateurs d’une même
ressource ont des actions des autres ; cet élément pouvant se révéler déterminant pour l’efficacité
de la gouvernance de cette dernière.

   Mots clefs : coopération sociale, bien public, framing, pression par les pairs




                                                 279


   Chapitre 3




                                             Résumé


De résultats importants montrent l’efficacité des mécanismes de sanction monétaires par les pairs
pour inciter à la coopération dans les jeux de bien public. Dans cette expérience, nous étudions
si l’efficacité des sanctions peut être affecté par le framing du jeu, i.e. la façon de présenter les
résultats d’une action sans en altérer les effets économiques, (Levin et al., 1998). Pour ce faire,
nous reproduisons le plan d’expérience défini par Andreoni (1995) qui présente les interactions
stratégiques comme générant des externalités positives ou au contraire négatives ; et nous y
introduisons des sanctions monétaires (Fehr & Gächter, 2000). Ces dernières sont couteuses pour
l’envoyeur et pour le destinataire. Lorsqu’il n’y a pas de sanction par les pairs, nous confirmons
les résultats obtenus par Andreoni. Les contributions au compte de groupe sont plus faibles dans
le framing négatif que dans le framing positif.

    Lorsque la punition par les pairs est possible, on observe une forte augmentation des contribu-
tions dans le framing positif, où la quasi-totalité des groupes aboutissent à des niveaux de contri-
butions correspondant à leurs entières dotations. En comparaison, l’augmentation des contribu-
tions est moindre dans le framing négatif ; les niveaux de contributions avoisinent les 45% des
dotations. Cette réaction différente aux sanctions est observée dès la première période suivant
leur introduction et avant que les sujets ne reçoivent leurs premières sanctions.

    Un plus grand nombre de pénalité est infligée dans le framing négatif. Cependant, les mêmes
déterminants des décisions de sanction sont observés entre les deux framing. Le principal facteur
étant un moindre niveau de contribution que les autres individus du groupe. Nous suggérons que
la plus faible coopération observée lorsque les sanctions sont possibles dans le framing négatif,
est due à une plus faible efficacité des points de sanction reçus. Le fait de présenter les actions
des autres comme ayant des effets négatifs sur les gains rend plus difficile l’établissement d’une
norme de contribution. La dispersion des contributions est plus élevée dans le framing négatif
que le framing positif où cette dernière induit une convergence vers l’entière contribution.

   Mots clefs : coopération sociale, bien public, framing, punition par les pairs




                                                280


   Conclusion
    Dans cette conclusion, nous résumons tout d’abord les principaux résultats des deux axes
d’investigation que nous avons développés dans la thèse, à savoir i) l’effet de la divulgation des
actions des individus dans un contexte de ressource commune et ii) l’effet de la présentation de
la problématique de l’action collective sur la dynamique de groupe dans un contexte de bien
public. Pour chacun de ces deux sujets, nous proposons un débat sur les limites spécifiques et
les extensions potentielles qui auraient pu être faites en laboratoire. Nous croyons fermement
que les expérimentations en laboratoire présente des avantages considérables pour identifier et
démêler les effets de la mesure étudiée, dans notre cas : l’information sociale. Avec la même force,
nous pensons que, si ce travail est absolument nécessaire pour tenter de saisir les généralités du
comportement humain, il n’est pas suffisant pour présupposer les effets d’une mesure dans une
situation concrète donnée. Pour ce faire, une compréhension approfondie du contexte micro-
situationnel est nécessaire. Comme nous l’expliquerons brièvement à la fin de cette discussion,
les outils et les méthodes pour y parvenir restent à développer. Dans la dernière partie de cette
discussion, nous identifierons les questions communes résultant des deux thèmes développés dans
cette thèse sur l’effet de l’information sur l’action collective lorsque la gestion des ressources
naturelles est en jeu.



Chapitre 1 : Résultats et mise en perspectives

    Dans le premier chapitre, nous montrons que le mécanisme basé sur l’affichage volontaire des
extractions n’a pas été efficace pour promouvoir la coopération. Néanmoins, dans les premières
périodes suivant son introduction, la divulgation volontaire est utilisée pour signaler la volonté de
coopérer. Les sujets qui sont en faveur de l’affichage ont des extractions nettement inférieures à
ceux qui sont contre. Par conséquent, l’efficacité de la communication ("cheap talk") pour mener
à bien une action collective ne s’explique pas seulement par le fait qu’elle permet aux sujets de
signaler leur type (volonté de coopérer), ni par le fait qu’elle permet à une majorité de sujets de
s’entendre sur leur volonté de divulguer leurs extractions. Ces mécanismes volontaires ne peuvent
pas infléchir l’augmentation de l’extraction lorsqu’ils sont appliqués seuls, et ne peuvent éviter
la surexploitation de la ressource.

     Dans cette expérience, nous démontrons également qu’une partie importante des sujets a
effectivement des préférences sociales, plus précisément des préférences pour un partage égal.
Ces préférences les amènent à avoir des niveaux d’extraction relativement plus faibles. Mais ces
préférences sociales ne suffisent pas à elles seules à générer et à maintenir la coopération. Au cours
du jeu, l’extraction ne cesse d’augmenter. Ce résultat est néanmoins cohérent avec les prédictions
théoriques, qui montrent que les préférences pour l’aversion aux inégalités ou pour la conformité
peuvent conduire à une augmentation de l’extraction des groupes lorsque cette dernière est
affichée. L’analyse de l’évolution des extractions montre que les modèles d’apprentissage qui
expliquent le mieux la dynamique de groupe sont : l’imitation de la moyenne et la meilleure
réponse intéressée.

    Néanmoins, nous devons souligner que lorsque les extractions des individus sont automatique-
ment divulguées, nous observons une différence dans les stratégies d’extraction selon la valeur
d’orientation des sujets. Cette différence ne peut être observée lorsque les sujets n’obtiennent
que l’extraction globale. Lorsque toutes les extractions sont affichées, les sujets individualistes
sont plus susceptibles d’imiter l’extraction la plus élevée et sont moins susceptibles de suivre l’


                                                 281


extraction moyenne. Alors que pour les sujets pro sociaux, la dynamique de l’extraction s’ex-
plique principalement par une combinaison de l’imitation du extraction moyenne affiché et de
la meilleure réponse self-interested. Dans une moindre mesure, ils imitent également l’ exemple.
Cependant, cette dernière stratégie n’est pas adoptée dans une mesure suffisante par tous les
membres du groupe pour affecter la dynamique d’extraction du groupe. L’adoption de la plus
forte extraction affichée (le pire comportement) par certains membres du groupe donne du crédit
à la thèse selon laquelle l’affichage d’extractions individuelles et/ou de gains individuels peut
aggraver la tragédie des ressources communes en le faisant apparaître plus rapidement (Villena
& Zecchetto, 2011).

   En ce qui concerne les limites et les prolongements possibles de ce chapitre, il aurait été
souhaitable d’étudier les effets 1) d’une information complète (en affichant les gains des indivi-
dus), 2) d’une norme injonctive, avec des informations reflétant les attentes sociales en matière de
comportement ; sur la dynamique de groupe dans le cadre d’une gestion des ressources communes.

    Concernant l’effet de la divulgation d’une information complète, Weimann (1994) considèrent
que cela n’a aucun effet sur les contributions dans un contexte de bien public. Néanmoins, Bigoni
et Suetens (2012) réfutent ce résultat en montrant que la fourniture d’une information complète
accélère l’effondrement de la coopération. Les grands contributeurs ont tendance à imiter les
meilleurs résultats. Dans une expérience de marché oligopolistique à la Cournot, Offerman et al.
(2002) montrent également que la fourniture d’une information complète conduit à des compor-
tements plus compétitifs. Ces résultats sont conformes à ceux de Villena et Zecchetto (2011),
qui démontrent que dans un contexte de pool commun, la fourniture d’une information complète
peut aggraver une tragédie commune, en l’accélérant. Il aurait été intéressant d’analyser si nous
obtenons le même résultat que Villena et Zecchetto (2011) dans notre contexte de ressources
communes qui est caractérisé par une dépendance à la ressource. De plus, cette analyse nous
aurait permis de démêler les différents effets potentiels de la fourniture i) d’une extraction agré-
gée, ii) d’extractions individuelles, iii) d’une information complète, sur la dynamique de groupe.
Pour ce faire, il pourrait être intéressant d’introduire ces différents traitements dès la première
séquence de l’expérience. En effet, l’expérience de Croson (1995) a montré que les différences de
comportement entre les traitements où des informations agrégées ou individuelles sont affichées
peuvent prendre du temps à apparaître. Pour finir, en allant un peu plus loin, afin d’accroître
nos connaissances sur le fonctionnement des gouvernances autonomes, il aurait été intéressant
d’analyser si le fait de fournir une information complète dans un contexte de pool commun pou-
vait avoir un impact sur l’efficacité de la punition par les pairs. Le point de départ de cette
interrogation est l’expérience de Nikiforakis (2010). Dans cet article, il a comparé trois traite-
ments concernant le retour d’information fourni aux sujets : i) les contributions des autres, ii)
les revenus des autres et iii) les deux, et a conclu que la punition par les pairs est moins efficace
lorsque les sujets reçoivent les revenus de leurs pairs et surtout lorsqu’ils obtiennent les deux
types d’informations. Faire cette expérience nous aurait permis de déterminer si l’efficacité de la
punition par les pairs est affectée par le type de retour d’informations sociales fournies, dans un
contexte de ressources communes.

    De nombreux résultats d’expérimentation montrent que la fourniture d’informations sur le
comportement moyen, également appelé norme descriptive, conduit généralement à une conver-
gence des comportements vers celui-ci (Ferraro & Price, 2013 ; Schultz, 1999 ; Schultz et al.,
2007). Il convient également de souligner que lorsque les "feedbacks" concernant aux actions
des autres sont manipulées, ils influencent fortement la dynamique de groupe (Fleishman, 1988 ;
Weimann, 1994 ; Frey & Meier, 2004 ; Croson & Shang, 2008). Les sujets sont plus susceptibles
d’avoir un niveau élevé de contribution lorsqu’on leur dit que d’autres le font, confirmant ainsi


                                                282


une volonté de se conformer à la norme sociale. Schultz et al. (2007) montrent également que
l’ajout d’un symbole, qui signale aux sujets s’ils ont un bon ou un mauvais comportement en
matière d’attente sociale (une norme sociale injonctive), permet d’éviter l’"effet Boomerang". Il
aurait été intéressant d’étudier comment ce "nudge" peut impacter les comportements dans un
contexte de pool commun. Plus largement, il serait intéressant de continuer à étudier comment
la manipulation de l’information sociale a un impact sur les comportements des sujets, en ne
délivrant que des informations sur les comportements les plus vertueux.

    Enfin, une autre voie de recherche pourrait consister à étudier comment ces différents formats
d’informations sociales influencent le comportement selon les orientations sociales des sujets. Ces
recherches pourraient nous permettre de mieux identifier ce qui peut briser la dynamique de
groupe. Nous développerons cet aspect plus en détail dans la dernière partie de cette discussion.



Chapitres 2 et 3 résultats et mise en perspectives

     Dans les chapitres 2 et 3, nous montrons que la manière de présenter une problématique
d’action collective, en mettant en évidence les externalités positives ou négatives potentielles de
l’interaction sociale, peut influencer la volonté de coopérer (ceteris paribus). En considérant les
données qui ont composé ces chapitres 2 et 3, nous reproduisons en partie le résultat d’Andreoni
(1995b). Les sujets sont plus disposés à contribuer à un bien public lorsqu’ils perçoivent qu’ils font
du bien ("warm glow") que lorsqu’ils perçoivent qu’ils font du mal ("cold prickle"). Néanmoins,
l’effet de framing est fortement dépendant de la capacité inhérente des groupes à coopérer, et
c’est pourquoi, comme d’autres framing tel que le "give and take", cet effet est fragile.

    L’introduction de mécanismes de désapprobation, symbolique et matériel, permet d’augmen-
ter de manière significative les contributions au bien public par rapport Baseline. Pour les deux
types de sanctions, les déterminants de la punition sont similaires dans les deux framings ; ils sont
principalement déterminés par une comparaison avec les contributions des pairs. Moins un sujet
contribue par rapport à ses pairs, plus il sera désapprouvé. Néanmoins, le nombre de sanctions
symboliques et monétaires envoyées est légèrement plus élevé dans le framing négatif. Ceci est
lié à une plus grande dispersion des contributions au sein des groupes.

    Plus intéressant encore, nous constatons que lorsque les sanctions monétaires sont introduites
après une séquence dans laquelle les sujets n’ont pas pu exprimer leur désapprobation, le fra-
ming influence fortement la capacité du groupe à atteindre un fort niveau de contribution. La
réaction différente à l’introduction des sanctions est observée dès la première période suivant
leur introduction. Dans le framing positif, un pourcentage important (34 %) de sujets décident
de contribuer pleinement et ce pourcentage continue à augmenter jusqu’à la dernière période.
En revanche, dans le framing négatif, le pourcentage est plus faible (22 %) et il reste constant.
Paradoxalement, le nombre de sanctions envoyées est plus élevé dans le framing négatif.

    Lorsque nous essayons d’aller plus loin dans notre compréhension de l’impact du framing
sur le comportement, il en résulte qu’il a un impact sur la perception et la volonté déclarée de
rendre la pareille aux actions des autres. Dans notre expérience, nous démontrons clairement
que le framing négatif d’Andreoni (1995b) rend plus difficile pour les sujets d’établir les gains.
Nous faisons la conjecture que cette difficulté participe à la perception négative des actions des
autres qu’ils obtiennent à travers ce framing. Néanmoins, l’effet de framing ne peut être réduit
à une compréhension plus faible des incitations économiques. Il semble important de rappeler


                                                 283


que même dans le framing négatif, une majorité de sujets déclarent qu’ils contribueraient plei-
nement si les autres le faisaient, alors que nous n’observons jamais un tel pourcentage dans les
groupes dynamiques. En conséquence, un autre résultat intéressant est que la volonté des sujets
de coopérer dépend des contributions des autres, ce qui confirme qu’une majorité peut être qua-
lifiée de coopérateurs conditionnels comme l’ont montré Fischbacher et al. (2001). Cependant,
il convient de noter que le pourcentage de sujets qui déclarent qu’ils contribueront pleinement
si d’autres le font est également affecté par le framing. Les free riders inconditionnels sont légè-
rement plus nombreux lorsque les externalités négatives potentielles de l’interaction sociale sont
mises en évidence (Fosgaard et al., 2014 ; Gachter et al., 2017 ; Gachter et al., (Forthcoming)).
Nous confirmons ce résultat dans notre expérience.

     Un autre résultat intéressant, qui a été initialement trouvé par Park (2000), est que le framing
semble affecter plus fortement les sujets qui ont une orientation sociale individualiste. Dans la
première séquence du Baseline, les sujets individualistes ont un niveau de contribution différent
selon le framing, alors que nous n’observons pas une telle différence pour les sujets pro-sociaux.
En outre, leur coopération conditionnelle déclarée est plus fortement affectée par le framing, car
ils sont nettement moins disposés à contribuer pleinement dans le framing négatif. Enfin, ce sont
eux qui réagissent différemment à l’introduction de sanctions dans le framing négatif car ils sont
moins enclins à imiter le meilleur comportement affiché. En résumé, la manière dont la question
de l’action collective est présentée et perçue affecte fortement la dynamique de groupe. Lorsque
des sanctions monétaires sont introduites, le framing négatif restreint fortement la capacité des
groupes à converger vers une contribution totale. Alors que le nombre de sujets à orientation
pro-sociale est équivalent dans les deux framings. Par conséquent, le nombre de sujets disposés
à supporter le coût de la coopération devrait être identique.

    En ce qui concerne les limites et les extensions possibles, nous aurions pu mieux déterminer
les effets du framing, si notre base de données avait été vidée des groupes qui coopèrent pleine-
ment sans aucun mécanisme, même s’ils sont principalement composés de sujets individualistes.
Ces résultats sont particulièrement curieux et questionnants. De plus, pour mieux comprendre
comment le framing affecte la dynamique de groupe, il serait intéressant de montrer les actions
individuelles dans le Baseline. Cela permettrait également d’augmenter la comparaison avec les
traitements dans lesquels des mécanismes de désapprobation sont introduits et pour lesquels des
actions individuelles sont affichées. En outre, pour améliorer notre compréhension des effets du
framing, il serait nécessaire d’éliciter les croyances des sujets sur les actions des autres. Il a été
démontré que les croyances sont des effets conséquents du framing (Dufwenberg et al., 2011 ;
Fosgaard et al., 2014 ; Gachter et al., 2017). De plus, si l’on considère, comme notre analyse de
l’apprentissage tend à le confirmer, que les sujets se conforment à l’action des autres et, dans
une moindre mesure, y effectuent la meilleure réponse ; alors leur croyance dans les actions des
autres doit fortement influencer leurs comportements. Des enquêtes supplémentaires sont néces-
saires pour mieux comprendre comment le framing peut affecter le comportement attendu ou
répréhensible (Kahneman, 1992). L’intégration du test de jugement tel que défini par Cubitt et
al. (2011) dans l’expérience d’Andreoni pourrait être une piste. Pour finir, il serait intéressant
d’étudier plus en détail comment le framing affecte le comportement en fonction des types de
sujets. Plus précisément, cela nous permettra d’avoir plus d’indications pour confirmer que les
sujets individualistes sont particulièrement sensibles au changement de perception créé par le fra-
ming. Ceci nous amène aux questions communes qui découlent des axes de recherche développés
dans cette thèse.




                                                 284


Questions communes et propositions d’extension

    Dans cette dernière partie, nous discuterons des conclusions communes résultant des trois
chapitres de cette thèse. A savoir, l’effet des préférences sociales dans l’action collective, et com-
ment elles influencent la manière dont les sujets réagissent à l’information affichée. Pour chacun
d’eux, nous les confronterons à la littérature et enfin nous proposerons des pistes d’investigation
complémentaires.


La coopération conditionnelle, le conformisme et les préférences sociales comme
moteurs de la dynamique de groupe

     Un résultat commun qui ressort de ces trois chapitres est que le comportement de la majorité
des sujets dépend fortement du comportement de leurs pairs. C’est pourquoi, ils peuvent être
qualifiés de coopérateurs conditionnels (Fischbacher et al., 2001). Une étude comparative récente
montre que ce modèle de comportement est reproductible et constitue donc un résultat cohérent
(Thöni & Volk, 2018). Ce comportement peut être qualifié de goût du conformisme, car les sujets
se conforment aux actions des autres. Notre analyse de l’apprentissage montre également que dans
les deux cas, les ressources communes et les questions de bien public, le goût de la conformité
(i.e. l’imitation de l’action moyenne), est un moteur fiable de la dynamique de groupe.

    En outre, nos résultats mettent en évidence le fait que les préférences sociales sont un moteur
important des questions d’action collective. Les sujets ayant des préférences pro-sociales sont
plus susceptibles de coopérer à la fois sur des questions de pool commun et de bien public. Ces
résultats sont conformes aux résultats expérimentaux et théoriques, qui promettent de considérer
les préférences sociales comme un moteur important de la dynamique de groupe. Fischbacher et
Gächter (2010), dans une expérience publique en "Stranger conditions", démontrent que (i) le
type de sujets, défini par leur volonté de contribuer en fonction des contributions des autres
(Fischbacher et al., 2001) ; et (ii) le fait que les sujets actualisent leurs croyances sur les actions
des autres de manière non naïve, expliquent la diminution observée des contributions. En d’autres
termes, la prise en compte de la manière dont les différents sujets déclarent qu’ils vont réagir aux
actions des autres et de la manière dont ils actualisent leurs croyances, contribue à expliquer la
dynamique de groupe lorsqu’il n’existe pas de mécanisme pour favoriser la coopération. Ambrus
et Pathak (2011) proposent d’expliquer la contribution initiale et leur diminution progressive par
l’hétérogénéité des préférences sociales des sujets.

    Ces résultats soulèvent la question du lien potentiel entre les préférences sociales et le goût
du conformisme. Plus précisément : La volonté de se conformer à la norme sociale est-elle le
résultat de préférences sociales ou l’inverse ? Ce point appelle beaucoup plus de preuves avant
de pouvoir donner une explication. Au vu de nos résultats, nous serons tentés de donner du
crédit aux arguments développés par Fehr et Williams (2018). Ils affirment que la volonté de se
conformer, la norme de la coopération conditionnelle, ne peut expliquer : i) la volonté de punir
les resquilleurs ii) les préférences pour un contexte qui permet la punition par les pairs. C’est
pourquoi, ils considèrent que "la volonté de se conformer à la norme survient si les individus ont un
désir intrinsèque d’équité ou de justice". Notre analyse de l’apprentissage montre que lorsque les
extractions d’un individu sont affichées, les individus pro-sociaux ont plus tendance à continuer à
se conformer à l’extraction moyenne affichée et, dans une moindre mesure, à y répondre au mieux.
Ce comportement est cohérent avec le comportement de coopération conditionnelle imparfaite.
À l’inverse, les sujets individualistes ont plus tendance à imiter la pire extraction affichée, et ils

                                                 285


semblent plus sensibles aux biais de perception dans la manière dont ils réagissent à la pression
de leurs pairs.

    Sur la base de ces résultats, nous considérons qu’il convient d’accorder plus d’attention à la
manière dont les préférences sociales peuvent expliquer la dynamique de groupe. Plus particuliè-
rement, si l’on considère qu’un pourcentage conséquent de sujets est animé par un désir ou par
l’équité et la conformité, la question suivante se pose : "Comment pouvons-nous construire des
institutions qui régulent les actions des individus moins pro-sociaux ? Outre les actions qui mo-
difient les incitations monétaires, il serait intéressant d’aller plus loin dans l’étude de l’effet des
incitations non monétaires et plus particulièrement des effets d’information tels que l’information
complète ou la norme injonctive.


Niveau de détails des informations, heuristique et type de sujets

     Comme votre capacité de calcul est limitée, nous pouvons faire l’hypothèse que donner plus
d’informations sur la structure du jeu peut changer le comportement. Certains diront qu’Apeste-
guia (2006), semble contredire cette règle, car il considère que donner ou ne pas donner d’informa-
tions sur les gains conduit les sujets à atteindre l’équilibre de Nash dans tous les cas. Néanmoins,
les informations qu’il fournit dans ses deux traitements sont limitées. Dans un cas, il n’y a aucune
information et, dans l’autre, il y a une description de base de la fonction de gain et quelques
illustrations. Il ne fournit pas la structure des gains, i.e. les détails sur l’évolution de leurs revenus
en fonction de leurs actions mais aussi des actions des autres. Cette sensibilité à la comparaison
sociale est corroborée par l’expérience d’Andreoni (1995a), qui montre que l’ajout d’informations
sur le classement du sujet dans une VCM réduit la contribution des sujets. En d’autres termes,
lorsqu’ils disposent d’informations qui font explicitement une comparaison sociale, ils sont moins
enclins à coopérer.

    Toutefois, Saijo et Nakamura (1995) montrent que lorsque les sujets disposent d’informations
relativement peu nombreuses sur la structure des gains, ils sont plus susceptibles d’être "spitefull"
(méchants). Cela signifie qu’ils sont moins disposés à contribuer même lorsqu’il s’agit d’une
stratégie dominante. Au contraire, ils sont plus sensibles à la comparaison sociale (le classement
entre eux). En outre, Ramalingam et al. (2018) ont récemment démontré que dans un "Voluntary
contribution mechanism", des instructions plus courtes conduisent à un niveau de contribution
plus faible et à un niveau de sanction relativement plus élevé. Ce sont là des résultats importants,
car dans la vie réelle, les cas où les sujets sont capables d’avoir à l’esprit la matrice complète
des gains sont rares. Nous devons donc prendre en considération le fait que, dans la plupart
des situations, les gens sont susceptibles d’être plus méchants et de prêter plus d’attention à la
comparaison sociale que ce que la théorie prévoit.

     Dans une autre expérience, Huck et al. (2017) montrent qu’en situation d’information com-
plète, le fait de permettre aux sujets de calculer ce qu’auraient été leurs gains au cours de la
période précédente pour des choix alternatifs, conduit à des comportements moins coopératifs.
De part ces résultats, nous considérons qu’il faut accorder plus d’attention au format dans lequel
l’information est fournie (ajouter ou non la matrice des gains, permettre ou non aux sujets de
calculer leurs gains). Cela nous permettra de mieux comprendre quel type d’information peut
réduire le’"spite effect" ou, au contraire, rendre les sujets moins coopératifs.

    De plus, nous considérons que ces résultats renforcent l’intuition que fournir des informations
sociales peut avoir un impact significatif sur le comportement ; et qu’il est utile d’approfondir

                                                   286


notre compréhension en essayant de démêler ses effets. Il serait intéressant de mieux comprendre
comment les différents types d’informations : agrégées, actions individuelles, informations com-
plètes et ajout d’une dimension injonctive ; influencent la volonté de coopérer des sujets en les
distinguant par leur orientation sociale. Une expérience de terrain montre que la manipula-
tion des informations agrégées pourrait principalement affecter le comportement des sujets qui
pourraient être qualifiés de coopérateurs conditionnels (Frey & Meier, 2004). Des enquêtes sup-
plémentaires doivent être menées pour comprendre comment différents types de sujets réagissent
à divers types d’informations susceptibles de modifier leur perception de l’action des autres. À
cette fin, la poursuite de l’analyse de l’apprentissage pour mieux étudier l’heuristique des sujets
peut constituer une ligne de recherche intéressante.


Des pistes d’investigation complémentaires pour caractériser un contexte donné

    Il a été démontré que les préférences sociales sont fortement influencées par les contextes
culturels. Dans le cadre d’une étude interculturelle, Henrich et al. (2004) ont démontré que les
préférences sociales (mesurées par les jeux de dictateurs et les jeux ultimes) reflètent les liens entre
les gens par le biais d’un marché et leur dépendance sociale. Les baleiniers, dont la survie dépend
des autres, avaient les préférences sociales les plus élevées, tandis que les chasseurs-cueilleurs
isolés avaient les préférences les plus faibles. En outre, Andersen et al. (2008) montrent que le
contexte culturel pourrait avoir une forte influence sur le comportement de contribution dans un
VCM. Ils observent un pourcentage significativement plus faible de "free riders" dans la société
matrilinéaire. Cette différence est principalement due aux hommes, qui sont plus coopératifs dans
la société matrilinéaire. Un autre résultat intéressant est que le contexte a une influence sur la
sensibilité des sujets au framing de l’action collective. Dans les sociétés non matrilinéaires, la
contribution des sujets est plus faible dans le cadre négatif tel que défini par Andreoni (1995b).
Outre ces cas extrêmes, cette étude appelle à une meilleure compréhension de la manière dont
le contexte culturel façonne les préférences sociales et donc la volonté des sujets de rendre la
pareille (leur réciprocité). Comme nous l’avons montré, les préférences sociales pourraient être
des éléments importants à prendre en considération car elles peuvent influencer la façon dont les
sujets réagissent et utilisent les informations sociales.

     De plus, il semble important de mieux comprendre quelle est la perception que les gens ont
du problème d’action collective auquel ils sont confrontés et de l’effet de l’action des autres. Ces
perceptions pourraient avoir un impact sur leur volonté de coopérer et sur les mécanismes de
régulation auxquels ils sont favorables (Alesina et al., 2018). En outre, les perceptions peuvent
également avoir un impact sur la manière dont ils réagissent à la pression des pairs ou à la
punition des pairs. Nous démontrons que la perception créée par le framing peut avoir un impact
sur la façon dont les sujets réagissent à la punition par les pairs. Plus largement, Nikiforakis
(2010) a démontré que le type d’informations fournies concernant les actions des autres ont
également une influence importante sur l’efficacité de la punition par les pairs. Il est intéressant
de noter que ces différents effets dus à une perception différente ou aux informations sociales
affichées n’apparaissent pas toujours lorsqu’il n’y a pas de mécanismes susceptibles de favoriser
la coopération ; mais ils apparaissent clairement lorsqu’ils sont introduits. En conséquence, des
enquêtes sont nécessaires pour mieux comprendre comment, dans un contexte donné, les sujets
perçoivent le fonctionnement de l’action collective à laquelle ils sont confrontés, les effets des
actions des autres et ce qu’ils considèrent comme un comportement durable et acceptable.

   En outre, dans la plupart des situations concrètes de pool commun ou de bien public, les
gens sont hétérogènes en ce qui concerne leur dotation et leurs fonctions de production. Il faut

                                                  287


mieux comprendre comment cette hétérogénéité peut affecter les questions d’action collective,
à travers : leur perception de l’effet des actions des autres, leur volonté de coopérer, la façon
dont ils définissent le comportement acceptable et leur réaction aux informations sociales. En
effet, il y a de fortes raisons de penser que cette hétérogénéité pourrait rendre la définition d’un
comportement durable et acceptable plus complexe. Enfin, dans la plupart des actions concrètes
concernant la gestion des ressources naturelles, les sujets sont confrontés à des risques et à
des incertitudes qui ont un impact sur leurs gains. Des études supplémentaires sont nécessaires
pour mieux comprendre comment ces aspects peuvent avoir un impact sur la dynamique de
groupe, et plus particulièrement comment celle-ci peut interagir avec les informations sociales
fournies. La diffusion d’informations sociales pourrait modifier la perception qu’ont les sujets des
actions des autres et de ce qu’ils perçoivent comme étant le comportement souhaitable, la pensée
renforçant la norme sociale. Cialdini et al. (1990) ont défini la norme comme suit " ensemble
de croyances sur ce que les autres font ou ce qu’ils approuvent ou désapprouvent de faire". En
outre, certaines expériences montrent que plus les sujets font confiance en leurs pairs, plus ils
sont susceptibles d’adapter leur comportement en cas de variation des ressources et d’incertitude
concernant ces dernières (Brann & Foddy, 1987 ; Baggio et al., 2015). Ces résultats appellent
à plus d’investigations sur la manière dont différents systèmes d’information pourraient aider à
gérer les ressources naturelles, dans un contexte mondial où le risque et l’incertitude augmenteront
en raison du changement climatique.

    Pour conclure, cette thèse apporte de nouvelles preuves que la diffusion d’informations so-
ciales et la façon dont le collectif est présenté, et donc perçu, ont un impact sur la capacité des
groupes à coopérer. En outre, elle met en lumière le fait que les préférences sociales sont des
moteurs importants de la dynamique de groupe, en apportant des explications sur les raisons
pour lesquelles la diffusion d’informations détaillées sur les actions des sujets peut aggraver la
tragédie de la communauté. Elle nous invite à développer des recherches plus approfondies sur la
manière dont différents types d’informations sociales, telles qu’une information complète, l’ajout
de normes d’injonction, de classement ou d’information plus détaillée sur la structure des gains,
peuvent promouvoir des comportements vertueux ou au contraire accroître les comportements
compétitifs. Étant donné que la plupart des sujets sont des coopérateurs conditionnels, cela per-
mettra de mieux identifier quel type d’information (dans les coups de coude) permet d’obtenir
des comportements coopératifs. Enfin, cela pourrait nous permettre d’identifier quel type d’in-
formation sociale pourrait être fourni pour renforcer la confiance et donc le capital social des
groupes dépendant des ressources.




                                                288


                                                                        Table des matières




General introduction                                                                                   1


1 The effect of social information and voluntary display of individual extractions
  in a common pool resource context                                                11

   1.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   12

   1.2   The CPR model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        14

   1.3   Experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      16

   1.4   Behavioral hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17

         1.4.1   How behavioral aspects can explain the social information effect . . . . . .         18

         1.4.2   Learning models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      23

   1.5   Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     25

         1.5.1   Analysis of the voluntary displaying treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        27

         1.5.2   Analysis of group dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31

   1.6   Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   35


Appendices of chapter 1                                                                               41

   1.A Instructions of the social information experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          41

         1.A.1 Common pool resource . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         41


                                                  289


        1.A.2 Social Value Orientation estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         49

        1.A.3 Understanding questions in the social information experiment . . . . . . .              50

  1.B Characteristics of Experimental Sessions in the social information experiment . .               52

  1.C Description of demographics variables in the social information experiment . . . .              52

  1.D Non parametric tests in the social information experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . .             54

  1.E Details in the voluntary treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         54

  1.F Diff and Diff analysis in the social information experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . .           55


2 Introduction of chapters 2 and 3                                                                    59

  2.1   Introduction of chapters 2 and 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        59

  2.2   The experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       61

  2.3   Behavioral predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      62

  2.4   Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   63


Appendices of the Introduction of chapters 2 and 3                                                    73

  2.A Robustness check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        73

  2.B Analysis including groups’ initial contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         74

  2.C Details of the cooperative groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         78

  2.D Analysis without the cooperative groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           81


3 Effectiveness of peer’s pressure under negative framing                                             85

  3.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    86

  3.2   Experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       88

  3.3   Behavioural predictions for symbolic sanctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        89

  3.4   Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      90

        3.4.1   Voluntary contributions under different framing with and without peer
                pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    90

        3.4.2   Disapproval behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      95


                                                 290


        3.4.3   Responsiveness to symbolic sanctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     98

        3.4.4   What are the potential effects of the frame on perception and the stated
                conditional contributions ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103

        3.4.5   Does peer pressure affect payoffs ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107

  3.5   Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110


Appendices of chapter 2                                                                          115

  3.A Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

        3.A.1 Announcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115

        3.A.2 Public good game       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116

        3.A.3 Social Value Orientation test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122

        3.A.4 Understanding questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123

  3.B Characteristics of Experimental Sessions for symbolic sanctions experiment           . . . 125

  3.C Description of demographics variables for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . 125

  3.D Non parametrics tests for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

  3.E Robutness check for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128

        3.E.1 Supplementary analysis for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . 128

        3.E.2 Contribution dynamics taking into account the group’s initial contribution
              for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130

        3.E.3 Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions experiment 133

        3.E.4 Without the highly cooperative groups for symbolic sanctions experiment             136

  3.F Diff and Diff analysis for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139

  3.G Number of symbolic sanctions sent by sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145

        3.G.1 Propensity to send symbolic sanction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145

        3.G.2 Number of symbolic sanctions sent by deviation level . . . . . . . . . . . . 146

  3.H Number of symbolic sanctions received by sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147

        3.H.1 Symbolic sanctions received in Removal conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147


                                                291


        3.H.2 Symbolic sanctions received in Introduction conditions . . . . . . . . . . . 148

  3.I   Contribution’s change for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149

  3.J   Emergence of a common contribution standard with symbolic sanctions             . . . . . 151

        3.J.1   Full contributors for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151

        3.J.2   Free riders for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152

  3.K Payoffs complementary analysis for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . 153

  3.L Others potential effects of the frame for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . 153

        3.L.1   Judgment complementary analysis for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . 153

        3.L.2   Strategic understanding for symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . 154

        3.L.3   Framing effect by subjects’type for symbolic sanctions experiment        . . . . 157


4 Effectiveness of peer’s punishment under negative framing                                      161

  4.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162

  4.2   Experimental Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164

  4.3   Behavioral predictions for material sanctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166

  4.4   Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167

        4.4.1   Voluntary contributions under different framing with and without punish-
                ment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167

        4.4.2   Sanctioning behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 172

        4.4.3   Responsiveness to monetary sanctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 176

        4.4.4   What are the potential effects of the frame on perception and stated condi-
                tional contributions ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183

        4.4.5   Framing, punishment and group payoffs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186

  4.5   Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188


Appendices of chapter 3                                                                          193

  4.A Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193

        4.A.1 Announcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193

                                                292


      4.A.2 Public good game       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 194

      4.A.3 Social Value Orientation test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201

      4.A.4 Understanding questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 202

4.B Characteristics of Experimental Sessions for monetary sanctions experiment . . . 204

4.C Description of demographics variables for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . 204

4.D Non parametric tests on group contribution to public good for monetary sanctions
    experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206

4.E Robustness analysis for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207

      4.E.1 Supplementary analysis for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . 207

      4.E.2 Average contribution over time by group for monetary sanctions experiment210

4.F Diff and Diff analysis for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211

4.G Number of monetary sanctions sent by sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216

      4.G.1 Probit analysis of the number of monetary sanctions sent . . . . . . . . . 216

4.H Number of monetary sanctions received by sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217

      4.H.1 Removal condition for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . 217

      4.H.2 Introduction condition for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . 218

      4.H.3 Tobit analysis of the number of monetary sanctions received . . . . . . . . 219

4.I   Contribution change for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221

4.J   Emergence of a common contribution standard for monetary sanctions experiment 222

      4.J.1   Full contributors for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . 222

      4.J.2   Full contributors for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . 224

      4.J.3   Free riders for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225

      4.J.4   Analysis of the spread of individual contributions for monetary sanctions
              experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 225

      4.J.5   Gini analysis for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227

4.K Payoffs complementary analysis for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . 230



                                             293


  4.L Others potential effects of the frame for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . 231

        4.L.1   Judgment complementary analysis for monetary sanctions experiment . . 231

        4.L.2   Strategic understanding for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . . . . . 233

        4.L.3   Framing effect by subjects’ type for monetary sanctions experiment . . . . 236


5 Discussion of chapters 2 and 3                                                               239

  5.1   Does framing affect the perception of others’ decisions ? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 240

  5.2   How does framing affect the willingness to reciprocate ?     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 242


Appendices of the discussion of chapters 2 and 3                                               255

  5.A Perception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 255

  5.B Strategic understanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 256


General conclusion                                                                             259


Traduction en français                                                                         271




                                               294


                                                                              Table des figures




1.1   Schema best response altruism.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         20

1.2   Schema best response reciprocity.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        21

1.3   Evolution of the average extraction by treatment in the social information experiment.      . . . .    25

1.4   Extraction level in the first period depending on the willingness to display extractions.   . . . .    28

1.5   Evolution of the average extraction level depending on the willingness to display extractions.     .   28

1.6   Percentage of groups having a majority in favor of displaying their extractions.   . . . . . . . .     29

1.7   Distribution of the number of vote in favor of display by subjects according to the treatment.     .   29


2.1   Evolution of the average group contribution in Introduction condition for all framing data.      . .   64

2.2   Evolution of the average group contribution in Removal condition for all framing data.      . . . .    64

2.C.1Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction condi-
     tion). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            79

2.C.2Evolution of public good contribution in Introduction condition (excluding cooperative groups).         79


3.1   Evolution of the average group contribution in the Introduction condition in Symbolic sanctions
      experiment.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          91

3.2   Evolution of the average group contribution in the Removal condition in Symbolic sanctions
      experiment.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          92

3.3   Evolution of the average group contribution in the Baseline.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       92


                                                   295


3.4   Evolution of the number of symbolic sanctions received.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      95

3.5   Likelihood to receive symbolic sanctions by deviation level (with number of observations).   . . .   97

3.6   Average number of symbolic sanctions received by deviation level (with number of observations).      97

3.7   Contribution change depending of the numbers of symbolic sanction received    . . . . . . . . .      99

3.8   Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period
      in Symbolic sanctions experiment.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

3.9   Evolution of contribution categories in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Baseline).   . . . . . . . 102

3.10 Evolution of contribution categories in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Removal condition). . . 102

3.11 Evolution of contribution categories in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction condition). 103

3.12 Perception of others’ actions effect by treatment in Symbolic sanctions experiment . . . . . . 104

3.13 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Symbolic sanctions experiment (all data pre-
     sented in this chapter) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106


3.14 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Removal condi-
     tion) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107


3.15 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction
     condition) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107


3.C.1Distribution of understanding score by framing in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . 126

3.E.1 Average contribution over time by group (Baseline). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133

3.E.2 Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions experiment (Introduction condi-
      tion). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134


3.E.3 Average contribution over time by group for symbolic sanctions experiment (Removal condition). 135

3.G.1Number of symbolic sanctions sent by deviation level (Removal condition). . . . . . . . . . . 146

3.G.2Number of symbolic sanctions sent by deviation level (Introduction condition). . . . . . . . . 146

3.H.1Evolution of the number of symbolic sanctions received (Removal condition). . . . . . . . . . 147

3.H.2Likelihood of being disapproved by deviation level (with number of observations in Removal
     condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147


3.H.3Average number of symbolic sanctions received from deviation level (with number of observations
     in Removal condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147


3.H.4Evolution of the number of symbolic sanctions received (Introduction condition). . . . . . . . 148


                                                 296


3.H.5Likelihood of being disapproved by deviation level (with number of observations in Introduction
     condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148


3.H.6Average number of symbolic sanctions received by deviation level (with number of observations
     in Introduction condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148


3.I.1 Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period
      in Symbolic sanction experiment (Removal condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149


3.I.2 Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period
      in Symbolic sanction experiment (Introduction condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149


3.J.1 Evolution of contribution categories in Symboolic sanction experiment (Introduction condition,
      cooperative groups excluded). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152


3.L.1 Stated contributions declared if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoff in
      Symbolic sanction experiment (all data presented in this chapter) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155


3.L.2 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoff in Symbolic
      sanction experiment (Removal conditions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155


3.L.3 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoff in Symbolic
      sanction experiment (Introduction conditions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156


3.L.4 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in Symbolic
      sanction experiment (Introduction conditions cooperative groups excluded) . . . . . . . . . . 156


3.L.5 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize group payoff in Symbolic
      sanction experiment (Introduction conditions, cooperative groups excluded) . . . . . . . . . . 157



4.1   Evolution of the average group contribution in the Baseline.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 170

4.2   Evolution of the average group contribution in the Introduction condition in Monetary sanction
      experiment.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171

4.3   Evolution of the average group contribution in the Removal condition in Monetary sanction
      experiment.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171

4.4   Evolution of the number of monetary sanctions received.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 174

4.5   Likelihood of receiving monetary sanctions by deviation level (with the number of observations).   174

4.6   Average number of monetary sanctions received by deviation level (with the number of observation). 175


4.7   Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period
      in Monetary sanction experiment (Removal condition).      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178

4.8   Average contribution change with respect to deviation from peer average over previous period
      in Monetary sanction experiment (Introduction condition).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179


                                                 297


4.9   Evolution of contribution categories in Monetary sanction experiment (Introduction condition).   181

4.10 Evolution of contribution categories in Monetary sanction experiment (Removal condition). . . 181

4.11 Evolution of contribution categories (Baseline). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182

4.12 Perception of others’actions by framing in Monetary sanction experiment. . . . . . . . . . . 184

4.13 Stated contribution conditional on others’ full contribution in Monetary sanction experiment (all
     data presented in this chapter) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 185


4.14 Total cost of monetary sanctions by framing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187

4.C.1Comprehension score by framing in Monetary sanction experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206

4.E.1 Average contribution over time by group (Baseline). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210

4.E.2 Average contribution over time by group for monetary sanctions experiment (Introduction condi-
      tion). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 210


4.E.3 Average contribution over time by group for monetary experiment (Removal condition). . . . . 211

4.H.1Likelihood of receiving monetary sanctions by deviation level (with number of observations in
     Removal condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217


4.H.2Evolution of the number of monetary sanctions received (Removal condition). . . . . . . . . . 217

4.H.3Average number of monetary sanctions received from deviation level (with numbers of observa-
     tions in Removal condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217


4.H.4Likelihood of receiving monetary sanctions by deviation level (with number of observations in
     Introduction condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218


4.H.5Evolution of the number of monetary sanctions received (Introduction condition). . . . . . . . 218

4.H.6Average number of monetary sanctions received from deviation level (with observations numbers
     in Introduction condition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 218


4.J.1 Percentage of deviation from peers contributions by framing in Monetary sanction experiment . 222

4.J.2 Spread of individual contributions in Monetary sanction experiment (Removal condition) . . . 226

4.J.3 Spread of individual contributions in Monetary sanction experiment (Introduction condition) . 226

4.J.4 Spread of individual contributions in Monetary sanction experiment (Baseline treatment) . . . 227

4.J.5 Evolution of the Gini index in the Introduction condition in Monetary sanction experiment. . . 228

4.J.6 Evolution of the Gini index in the Removal condition in Monetary sanction experiment. . . . . 228



                                                 298


4.J.7 Evolution of the Gini index in the Baseline treatment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 229

4.L.1 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in Monetary
      sanction experiment (all data presented in this chapter) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234


4.L.2 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in Monetary
      sanction experiment (Removal condition) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 234


4.L.3 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize individual payoffs in Monetary
      sanction experiment (Introduction condition) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235


4.L.4 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize group payoff in Monetary
      sanction experiment (Removal condition) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235


4.L.5 Stated contributions if others fully contribute in order to maximize group payoff in Monetary
      sanction experiment (Introduction condition) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236



5.1   Understanding score by framing (All data of chapters 2 and 3)    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 241

5.2   Stated contributions if others fully contribute in Baseline   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243

5.3   Stated contributions by type when others fully contribute for all framing data   . . . . . . . . 244

5.B.1 Stated contributions if others fully contribute for all framing data (in order to maximize indivi-
      dual payoff) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257


5.B.2 Stated contributions by type when others fully contribute for all framing data (in order to
      maximize individual payoff) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257




                                                   299


300


                                                                             Liste des tableaux




1.1   Number of subjects per treatment in the social information experiment . . . . . .                    16

1.2   Information disclosed by treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               17

1.3   Panel tobit estimation of individuals extractions in the social information experiment (two sided,
      random effects).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26

1.4   Panel tobit estimation of individuals extractions in voluntary sharing treatments (two sided,
      random effects).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31

1.5   Replication of Huck model, panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects     . . . . . . . . .    32

1.6   Replication of Huck model for the Complusory treatment distinguishing by subjects types, panel
      tobit estimation two sided, random effects.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      33

1.7   Replication of Huck model for the Baseline conditions during sequence distinguishing by subjects
      types, panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     34

1.B.1Characteristics of expeimental sessions in the social information experiment . . .                    52

1.C.1Gender summary statistics in the social information experiment                   . . . . . . . . .    52

1.C.2Age summary statistics in the social information experiment                  . . . . . . . . . . .    52

1.C.3SVO_score summary statistics in the social information experiment . . . . . . .                       53

1.C.4SVO type summary statistics in the social information experiment . . . . . . . .                      53

1.C.5Understanding summary statistics in the social information experiment                     . . . . .   53

1.C.6Capacity to identify the Pareto Optimum summary statistics . . . . . . . . . . .                      53



                                                    301


1.D.1Mann Whitney test during the first sequence (Baseline) in the social information
     experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   54

1.D.2Mann Whitney test during the five last periods of the first sequence (Baseline) in
     the social information experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      54

1.D.3Mann Whitney test in the second sequence in the social information experiment .                            54

1.E.1Percentage of groups displaying their extractions by treatment [number of groups]                          55

1.E.2Percentage of number of vote in favor of display by treatment . . . . . . . . . . .                        55

1.F.1 Diff and Diff analysis between Baseline and Voluntary treatment (panel tobit estimation, two
      sided random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              56

1.F.2 Diff and Diff analysis between Baseline and Compulsory treatment (panel tobit estimation, two
      sided random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              57

1.F.3 Diff and Diff analysis between Baseline and Majority treatment (panel tobit estimation, two
      sided random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              58


2.1   Numbers of subjects [groups] per treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      61

2.2   Individual contributions to the group account for all framing data (panel tobit estimation two
      sided, random effects).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           65

2.3   Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions for all framing data (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).    . . . . . . . . .       66

2.4   Diff and Diff analysis in the negative framing Introduction condition for symbolic sanctions
      (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         68

2.A.1Individual contributions to the group account for all framing data (panel regression random
     effects with cluster by group). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              73

2.A.2Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
     tions for all framing data (panel regression random effects with cluster by group). . . . . . . .          74

2.B.1 Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group for all framing
      data (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects, first period excluded)). . . . . . . . .           75

2.B.2 Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group, discriminating
      for Removal and Introduction conditions, all framing data (panel tobit estimation two sided
      random effects, first period excluded).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         76

2.B.3 Individual contributions to the group account, all framing data (panel regression random effects
      with cluster by group, first period excluded). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            77

2.B.4 Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions, all framing data (panel regression random effects with cluster by group, first period excluded).   78

                                                     302


2.C.1Details of subject type by group for the three groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  80

2.C.2Details of subject gender by group for the three groups                . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     80

2.C.3Diff and Diff analysis in the negative framing Introduction condition for symbolic sanctions
     without cooperative groups (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects). . . . . . . . .          80

2.D.1Individual contributions to the group account, for all framing data excluding the three coopera-
     tive groups excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . .        81

2.D.2Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions, for all framing data excluding the three cooperative groups excluded (panel tobit estimation
      two sided random effects).     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      82

2.D.3Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group, for all framing
      data excluding the three cooperative groups excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided random
      effects)).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      83

2.D.4Individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the group discriminating
      for Removal and Introduction conditions, for all framing data excluding the three cooperative
      groups excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided random effects).    . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     84


3.1   Number of subjects per treatment in Symbolic sanction experiment [number of
      groups] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           88

3.2   Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel tobit
      estimation two sided, random effects).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      93

3.3   Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel tobit estimation, random effects).      . . . . . . .   94

3.4   Subject i’s propensity to send symbolic sanction to subject j (probit analysis with cluster by
      subject).      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      96

3.5   Number of symbolic sanctions received (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).     . . .   98

3.6   Contribution change (t) in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel regression random effects with
      clusters by group).    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

3.7   Perception of others’ actions in Symbolic sanctions experiment (ordered logit analysis).    . . . . 105

3.8   Individual payoffs in Symbolic sanctions experiment (panel regression, random effects).     . . . . 108

3.9   Individual payoffs discriminating for Removal and Introduction conditions in Symbolic sanctions
      experiment (panel regression, random effects).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109

3.B.1Characteristics of experimental sessions in Symbolic sanction experiment                     . . . . 125

3.C.1Gender summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . 125


                                                    303


3.C.2Age summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

3.C.3SVO_score summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . 126

3.C.4SVO type summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . 126

3.C.5Understanding summary statistics in Symbolic sanction experiment                      . . . . . . . 127

3.D.1Mann Whitney analysis in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

3.D.2Wilcoxon analysis in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

3.E.1 Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanction experiment(panel regressions
      random effects with clusters by groups). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128


3.E.2 Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel regressions random effects with clusters by groups). 129


3.E.3 Individual contributions to the group account without interaction variable in Symbolic sanction
      experiment (panel regressions random effects with clusters by groups). . . . . . . . . . . . . 129


3.E.4 Individual contributions to the group account without interaction variable in Symboolic sanction
      experiment (panel tobit estimation random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130


3.E.5 Panel regressions of individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of the
      group in Symbolic sanction experiment (random effects, cluster by group, first period of sequence
      1 excluded).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131

3.E.6 Panel tobit estimation of individual contributions taking into account the initial contribution of
      the group in Symbolic sanction experiment (random effects, first period of sequence 1 excluded).       132

3.E.7 Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel regression
      with clusters by groups, cooperative groups excluded). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136


3.E.8 Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel regression with clusters by groups, cooperative
      groups excluded).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137

3.E.9 Individual contributions to the group account in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel tobit
      estimation, cooperative groups excluded). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138


3.E.10Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation, cooperative groups excluded).         . 139

3.F.1 DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 1 in the positive frame
      (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140


3.F.2 DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 1 in the negative frame
      (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141




                                                   304


3.F.3 DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 2 in the positive frame
      (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142


3.F.4 DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 2 in the negative frame
      (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143


3.F.5 DiD between baseline and introduction of symbolic sanction in sequence 2 in the negative frame
      when cooperative groups are excluded (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects). . . . 144


3.G.1Subject’s i propensity to send symbolic sanctions to subject j (probit estimation with cluster by
     suject). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145


3.I.1 Contribution change (t) in Symbolic sanction experiment (panel analysis random effects with
      clusters by group). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150


3.I.2 Contribution change (t) by type in Symbolic sanction experiment, with interaction variable
      (panel analysis random effects with clusters by group). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151


3.J.1 Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 1 of Symbolic sanction experiment. . 151

3.J.2 Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 2 of Symbolic sanction experiment. . 151

3.J.3 Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 1 of Symbolic sanction experiment. . . . . 152

3.J.4 Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 2 of Symbolic sanction experiment. . . . . 152

3.K.1Panel regression of individuals payoffs in Symbolic sanction experiment, without the interaction
     variable, random effects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153


3.L.1 Perception of others actions in Symbolic sanction experiment (ordered logit analysis, perception
      is reduced to 3 levels). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154


3.L.2 Percentage by stated contribution to maximize group payoff when others fully
      contribute in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

3.L.3 Percentage by stated contribution to maximize individual payoff when others fully
      contribute in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

3.L.4 Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the conditionnal contribution answer comparing the
      two frames in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

3.L.5 Mann Whitney analysis of the average contribution by subjects types in Symbolic
      sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158

3.L.6 Mann Whitney analysis of the average contribution by subjects types in Symbolic
      sanction experiment, excluding cooperative groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158

3.L.7 Mann Whitney analysis of contribution in the first period by types in Symbolic
      sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159



                                                305


3.L.8 Mann Whitney analysis excluding cooperative groups on the first period contri-
      bution in Symbolic sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159


4.1   Numbers of subjects per treatment in Monetary sanction experiment [number of
      groups] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164

4.2   Individual contributions to the group account in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit
      estimation two sided, random effects).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169

4.3   Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).   . . . 170

4.4   Subject’s i propensity to send monetary sanction to subject j (probit analysis with cluster by
      subject).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173

4.5   Number of monetary sanctions received (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects).    . . 175

4.6   Panel regression of individuals contribution change (t) by contributor type in Monetary sanction
      experiment (random effects with clusters by group).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 177

4.7   Panel regression of individuals contributions change, global (t) in Monetary sanction experiment
      (random effects with clusters by group).   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178

4.8   Gini analysis in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation two sided
      with one observation per group per period, random effects) . . . . . . . . . . . . 183

4.9   Panel regression on individual payoffs in Monetary sanction experiment (random effects).    . . . 186

4.10 Panel regression on individual payoffs discriminating for Removal and Introduction conditions
     in Monetary sanction experiment (random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 187


4.B.1Characteristics of experimental sessions in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . 204

4.C.1Gender summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . 204

4.C.2Age summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment                 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205

4.C.3SVO_score summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . 205

4.C.4SVO type summary statistics in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . 205

4.C.5Understanding summary statisticsin Monetary sanction experiment                     . . . . . . . 206

4.D.1Mann Whitney test in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 206

4.D.2Wilcoxon tests in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207

4.E.1 Individual contributions to the group account in Monetary sanction experiment (panel regression
      random effects with clusters by group). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207



                                                   306


4.E.2 Individual contributions to the group account discriminating for Removal and Introduction condi-
      tions in Monetary sanction experiment (panel regression random effects with clusters by group).    208

4.E.3 Individual contributions to the group account without interaction variable in Monetary sanction
      experiment (panel regression random effects with clusters by group). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 208


4.E.4 Individual contributions to the group account without the interaction variable in Monetary
      sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 209


4.F.1 DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 1 in the positive frame (panel
      tobit estimation, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 212


4.F.2 DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 1 in the negative frame (panel
      tobit estimation, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 213


4.F.3 DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 2 in the positive frame (panel
      tobit estimation, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 214


4.F.4 DiD between baseline and introduction of sanction in sequence 2 in the negative frame (panel
      tobit estimation, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215


4.G.1Subject i’s propensity to send monetary sanctions to subject j with demographics variables
     (probit analysis with cluster by suject). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 216


4.H.1Number of monetary sanction received without interaction variables (panel tobit estimation two
     sided, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219


4.H.2Number of monetary sanction received with interaction variables and demographics variables
     (panel tobit estimation two sided, random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 220


4.I.1 Panel regressions of individuals contributions change in Monetary sanction experiment, with
      demographics variables (random effects with clusters by group. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 221


4.I.2 Contribution change (t) by contributor type in Monetary sanction experiment, without demo-
      graphics variables (panel analysis random effects with clusters by group). . . . . . . . . . . . 222


4.J.1 Full contribution depending on frame in Monetary sanction experiment (probit regression). . . 223

4.J.2 Probit to get full contributors depending on the frame in Monetary sanction experiment, with
      interaction variable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 224


4.J.3 Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 1 of Monetary sanction experiment. . 224

4.J.4 Percentage of full contributors per treatment in sequence 2 of Monetary sanction experiment. . 224

4.J.5 Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 1 of Monetary sanction experiment. . . . . 225

4.J.6 Percentage of free riders per treatment in sequence 2 of Monetary sanction experiment. . . . . 225

4.J.7 Gini index by period, by treatment in Monetary sanction experiment                   . . . . . . 229


                                                  307


4.J.8 Gini analysis in Monetary sanction experiment (panel tobit estimation one obser-
      vation per group per period (two sided, random effects)) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 230

4.K.1Panel regression of individuals payoffs without the interaction variable in Monetary sanction
     experiment (random effects). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 231


4.L.1 Perception of others actions in Monetary sanction experiment (ordered logit analysis). . . . . . 232

4.L.2 Perception of others actions in Monetary sanction experiment (ordered logit analysis, perception
      is reduced to 3 levels). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233


4.L.3 Percentage by stated contribution to maximize group payoff when others fully
      contribute in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236

4.L.4 Percentage by stated contribution to maximize individual payoff when others fully
      contribute in Monetary sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236

4.L.5 Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the conditionnal contribution answerin Monetary
      sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 236

4.L.6 Mann Whitney analysis of the average contribution by subjects types in Monetary
      sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237

4.L.7 Mann Whitney analysis of contribution in the first period by types in Monetary
      sanction experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237


5.1   Perception of others actions for all framing data (ordered logit estimation).   . . . . . . . . . . 241

5.2   SVO type summary statistics for all framing data               . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243

5.3   Learning analysis of Sequence 1, panel tobit estimations two sided random effects (All data).      . 245

5.4   Learning analysis of Sequence 1 for Prosocial subjects, panel tobit estimations two sided random
      effects (All data)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 246

5.5   Learning analysis of Sequence 1 for Individualist subjects, panel tobit estimations two sided
      random effects.      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247

5.6   Learning analysis when monetary sanctions are available, panel tobit estimations two sided
      random effects (All data).    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 248

5.7   Learning analysis when monetary sanctions are available for Prosocial subjects, panel tobit
      estimations two sided random effects.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249

5.8   Learning analysis when monetary sanctions are available for Individualist subjects, panel tobit
      estimations two sided random effects.   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 250

5.A.1Perception of others actions for all framing data (ordered logit analysis). . . . . . . . . . . . 256




                                                   308


5.B.1Percentage of stated contribution categories by contributor types, to maximize
     group payoff when others fully contribute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257

5.B.2Percentage of stated contribution by contributor types to maximize individual
     payoff when others fully contribute . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258

5.B.3Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the conditionnal contribution answer by frame . . . 258

5.B.4Mann Whitney test on the average contribution by subject for Baseline in the first
     sequence (p-value) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 258

5.B.5SVO type number by treatment in Park (2000)’s experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . 258




                                            309
