         Multi-scale studies of Measeles virus nucleocapsid
                              assembly
                                            Serafima Guseva



      To cite this version:
    Serafima Guseva. Multi-scale studies of Measeles virus nucleocapsid assembly. Structural Biology [q-
    bio.BM]. Université Grenoble Alpes [2020-..], 2021. English. �NNT : 2021GRALV024�. �tel-03435885�




                                   HAL Id: tel-03435885
                 https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-03435885
                                      Submitted on 19 Nov 2021




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access               L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-     destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
entific research documents, whether they are pub-     scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
lished or not. The documents may come from            émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
teaching and research institutions in France or       recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
abroad, or from public or private research centers.   publics ou privés.


THÈSE
Pour obtenir le grade de
DOCTEUR DE L’UNIVERSITÉ GRENOBLE ALPES
Spécialité : Biologie Structurale et Nanobiologie
Arrêté ministériel : 25 mai 2016

Présentée par

Serafima GUSEVA
Thèse dirigée par Rob RUIGROK,Professeur
et codirigée par Martin BLACKLEDGE, CEA

préparée au sein du Laboratoire Institut de Biologie Structurale
dans l'École Doctorale Chimie et Sciences du Vivant

Etudes multi-échelles de l'assemblage de la
nucléocapside du virus de la rougeole

Multi-scale studies of Measeles virus
nucleocapsid assembly
Thèse soutenue publiquement le 18 mai 2021,
devant le jury composé de :
Monsieur ROB RUIGROK
PROFESSEUR DES UNIVERSITES, UNIVERSITE GRENOBLE ALPES,
Directeur de thèse
Monsieur MARTIN BLACKLEDGE
CADRE SCIENTIFIQUE DES EPIC, CEA CENTRE DE GRENOBLE, Co-
directeur de thèse
Madame TANJA MITTAG
DOCTEUR EN SCIENCES, ST. JUDE CHILDREN'S RESEARCH
HOSPITAL, Examinatrice
Monsieur MARKUS ZWECKSTETTER
PROFESSEUR, UNIVERSITE DE GÖTTINGEN, Rapporteur
Monsieur WINFRIED WEISSENHORN
PROFESSEUR DES UNIVERSITES, UNIVERSITE GRENOBLE ALPES,
Président
Madame MARIE-ANNE RAMEIX-WELTI
PROFESSEUR DES UNIVERSITES - PRATICIEN HOSPITALIER,
UNIVERSITE DE VERSAILLES - SAINT QUENTIN, Rapporteure


                                                                                   Remerciements




                                                               R emerciements
    Foremost, I would like to thank my thesis directors, Martin Blackledge and Rob Ruigrok, for
the opportunity to work in their laboratories. I cannot imagine another place where I would have
been able to grow more within 3 years. Thank you for all the support and the guidelines on the
path to the thesis. You have always been keen on listening to my interests and providing me with
freedom of choice. And most importantly, you transferred me the enthusiasm to make science,
motivating me to go further to the core.
    I would like to thank Sigrid Milles, who was carrying the measles project before. Thank you
for all the knowledge, encouragement and patience, for teaching me multiple techniques and for
always being available for any problem. I really appreciated working with you.
    I am very glad to work in such a fantastic group. Therefore, I would like to thank Luiza
Mamigonian Bessa and Aldo Camacho Zarcho for all the support on a daily basis in the lab and
in the office. It was a pleasure to work as a team on one of the projects. I cannot imagine better
colleagues.
    I would like to thank Nicola Salvi and Malene Jensen for all the help with NMR spectroscopy
and all the advice. Thank you for being ready to help in any emergency situation. I also thank
Damien Maurin for all the help in the lab and useful tricks.
    I would like to thank the following people for helping with this research project :
Emmanuelle Neumann, for the help with electron microscopy
Caroline Mass, for providing guidance on the biophysical platform
Jean-Philippe Kleman, for introducing me to the fluorescent microscopy techniques
Alicia Vallet, for all the help with NMR spectrometers.
    And my biggest thanks to my family and friends, for all the support you have shown me
through this research.
    Finally, I would like to dedicate my thesis to my nanny Tanja, who was telling me stories about
viruses during my childhood.




                                                 i




                                                                              Introduction générale




                                                            Introduction générale




I ntroduction générale.
     La séparation de phases est aujourd’hui considérée comme l’un des sujets les plus brûlants de
la biologie, susceptible de transformer la biologie et la biomédecine. Malgré de multiples exemples
et des preuves indiscutables de leur existence dans les cellules, la communauté scientifique discute
encore pour savoir s’il s’agit d’une "science à la va-vite ou d’une idée révolutionnaire". La sépara-
tion de phases est responsable de la formation d’organites sans membranes qui sont impliqués dans
l’arrangement du contenu cellulaire. Le cytoplasme et le noyau sont remplis de telles structures.
Et même si plusieurs processus se déroulent dans les cytoplasmes, ils peuvent être séparés spatia-
lement par des organites sans membranes. La découverte des biocondensats dans les cellules peut
enfin répondre à la question fondamentale de savoir comment les cellules organisent les molécules
nécessaires au bon endroit et au bon moment afin de réaliser une fonction particulière.
     Les bases du phénomène de séparation de phases ne sont pas encore totalement comprises, en
particulier pour les systèmes biologiques. Cependant, l’importance des protéines intrinsèquement
désordonnées (IDP) est soulignée dans de nombreuses études. Le rôle ces protéines intrinsèque-
ment désordonnées dans la biologie est sous-estimé en général, et les programmes universitaires
ignorent le plus souvent leur existence.
     Pour comprendre comment les organites sans membranes contrôlent les fonctions cellulaires,
il est important de définir les propriétés du système. Une série de techniques biophysiques peuvent
être utilisées pour caractériser les propriétés macroscopiques des gouttelettes. Cependant, la RMN
est probablement la seule technique qui permette d’étudier la séparation de phases au niveau mo-
léculaire et d’obtenir des informations de résolution atomique sur les interactions impliquées dans
leur formation, les changements dynamiques et structurels associés à la transition de phase.
     Un des exemples de séparation de phases en biologie est la formation de biocondensats de
protéines virales. Il apparaît que les composants viraux ne sont pas dissous dans le cytoplasme
mais concentrés dans ce que l’on appelle des usines virales. Les avantages d’une telle organisation
sont multiples : augmentation de la vitesse des réactions chimiques grâce à l’augmentation de la
concentration, contrôle des conditions environnementales, protection contre la reconnaissance du
système immunitaire de la cellule hôte. Dans cette thèse, les phénomènes de séparation de phase
sont étudiés à travers la machinerie de réplication du virus de la rougeole. Cette machinerie né-
cessite la polymérase et deux protéines accessoires : La Nucléoprotéine et la Phosphoprotéine.
La nucléoprotéine se lie à l’ARN viral et forme la capside, la phosphoprotéine accompagne cette
réaction ainsi que l’activité de la polymérase, la formation des usines virales et probablement beau-
coup d’autres qui ne sont pas encore identifiées. La phosphoprotéine possède de multiples sites de
liaison avec la nucléoprotéine qui sont actives à différentes étapes du cycle viral. La manière dont
la phosphoprotéine régule ses interactions avec la nucléoprotéine et contrôle ainsi la réplication
virale reste une question ouverte. ’étude présente est importante pour comprendre le mécanisme
de réplication de la rougeole dans les cellules ainsi que les virus apparentés. Elle permet également
d’avancer dans la description des principes de base de la séparation de phase liquide-liquide des
protéines, reliant ainsi la physique à la biologie cellulaire.
     Cette thèse est consacrée à plusieurs sujets :


                                                 iii


Introduction générale

    Tout d’abord, nous avons cherché à tester la capacité des nucléoprotéines et des phosphopro-
téines du virus de la rougeole à se séparer en phase et à déterminer le mécanisme de formation des
gouttelettes pour les protéines virales. De même, déterminer la fonction des biocondensats viraux
- ceci est présenté dans le chapitre 3.
    Ailleurs, pour étudier la phosphorylation de la phosphoprotéine de la rougeole in vitro et com-
prendre le rôle fonctionnel de la phosphorylation - c’est l’objet du chapitre 4.
    Enfin, afin de mieux comprendre le processus de séparation des phases des protéines, nous
avons comparé la structure et la dynamique des protéines dans les phases diluées et condensées -
ce qui est présenté au chapitre 5.




                                                iv




General introduction




                                                             General introduction




G eneral introduction.
    Phase separation is now considered to be one of the hottest topics in biology which might
transform our understanding of biology and biomedicine. Despite multiple examples and undoub-
table proofs of their existence in cells, the scientific community still discusses whether it is a
"Sloppy science or ground-breaking idea”. Phase separation is responsible for the formation of
membraneless organelles which are involved in the arrangement of cell content. The cytoplasm
and the nucleus are shown to be full of such structures. And even if several process take place
in cytoplasms, they can be spatially separated with membraneless organelles. The discovery of
biocondensates in the cell can finally answer the fundamental question of how cells organise the
necessary molecules at the right place and time to carry out a particular function.
    The basics of the phase separation phenomena are still not fully understood especially for bio-
logical systems. However, the importance of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) is highlighted
in many studies. IDPs role in biology is underestimated in general, while school and university
programs mostly ignore their existence.
    To understand how membraneless organelles control the cellular functions it is important to
define the properties of the system. A range of biophysical techniques can be used to characterise
macroscopic features of the droplets. However, NMR is probably the only technique which allows
to study phase separation at the molecular level and obtain atomic resolution information about
interactions involved in their formation, in terms of dynamic and structural changes associated
with the phase transition.
    One of the examples of phase separation in biology is the formation of viral proteins biocon-
densates. It appears that viral components are not dissolved in the cytoplasm but concentrated in
so-called viral factories. Multiple advantages for such organisation can be found : Increase in the
rate of chemical reactions due to the increase of concentration, control of the environmental condi-
tions, protection from the host cell immune system recognition. In this thesis, phase separation
phenomena is studied on the basis of measles virus replication machinery. The machinery requires
the polymerase and two accessory proteins : Nucleoprotein and Phosphoprotein. The Nucleopro-
tein binds to the viral RNA and forms nucleocapsids, the Phosphoprotein controls this reaction as
well as polymerase activity, formation of viral factories and probably many others which are not
identified yet. The Phosphoprotein has multiple binding sites with the Nucleoprotein which are
present at different stages of viral cycle. How the Phosphoprotein regulates its interactions with
the Nucleoprotein and thus controls viral replication is an open question.
    The present study is important for understanding the mechanism of measles replication in
cell as well as related viruses. And also provides the advances in the description of the basics of
liquid-liquid phase separation of proteins thereby linking physics with cellular biology.
    This thesis is dedicated to several subjects :
    First, we aimed to test the ability of measles virus Nucleoprotein and Phosphoprotein to phase
separate and to determine the mechanism of droplet formation. Also, to determine the function of
viral biocondensates - this is presented in Chapter 3.
    In addition, I aimed to study phosphorylation of measles Phosphoprotein in vitro and unders-


                                                 vi


                                                                             General introduction

tand the functional role of phosphorylation - this is the subject of Chapter 4.
    Finally, in order to better understand the process of protein phase separation, we compared the
protein structure and dynamics in dilute and condensed phases what as shown in Chapter 5.




                                                vii




            Première partie

Measles Virus Replication Machinery :
    Viral factories and Assembly
  Regulation via Phosphorylation.




                   1


                                                            Introduction
                                                                         1
An introduction on liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) is discus-
sed here: The phenomenon has been well described by polymer phy-
sics for many decades, however, its role and importance in biology
was revealed only recently. Different classes of phase separating
mixtures are reviewed with the biological examples for each of them.
In the second part, I discuss measles virus replication machinery:
The proteins involved in this process, three dimensional structure for
the folded parts and dynamics description for disordered regions,
their interactions with each other, and viral RNA. Next, I present a
review on studies of viral replication machinery forming membra-
neless organelles via LLPS in cellulo. Also, cellular proteins which
were found to be present in viral factories are summarised and pos-
sible roles of viral droplets are introduced.
The final part of this chapter is dedicated to the description of in-
trinsically disordered proteins. LLPS is often maintained by proteins
containing intrinsically disordered regions, which represent a sepa-
rate class of proteins. The characteristics of such proteins predeter-
mine their ability to phase separate.




                                  2


                                                                 1.1. Phase separation as a zeitgeist

1.1     Phase separation as a zeitgeist
    Intercellular compartmentalization is essential for maintaining various biochemical processes
as each of them requires particular components and specific conditions: pH, ion strength, etc.
Membrane organelles are known for centuries, for instance, the nucleus was first mentioned by An-
tonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1719. Due to the destructive effects of the commonly used techniques
to study cells, fragile membranless organelles remained concealed from scientists. Recently more
invasive methods to study living cells in details started to become available, resulting in a wave of
discoveries of membranless organelles. A range of such subcompartments have been known for
more than 20 years: Nuclear membranless organelles [121, 161, 190], and cytoplasmic P-bodies
[10] and stress granules [110]. Nowadays, many other membraneless organelles are discovered
and characterized, the information about them is summarized in the phase separation database
(PhaSepDB http://db.phasep.pro).
    Now it is well established that such biomolecular condensates originate via liquid-liquid phase
separation (LLPS), a spontaneous demixing usually observed with polymers. In cells, it is a re-
versible process that brings together proteins and nucleic acids in non-stoichiometrical dynamic
assembles.
    Membraneless organelles in cells are multicomponent structures and different proteins, nucleic
acids and small molecules were found inside them. In a simplistic description of system, these
components can be divided into those forming the scaffold (those that form the network and, thus,
essential for the phase separation) and molecules that can be considered as clients (those attracted
inside droplets via interaction with the scaffold). The second type may participate uniquely in
the functional role of the condensate, essential for the cell and may change the properties of the
droplet, however, it may not be necessary for the initial formation so, in the following parts we
will focus on the scaffold part.
    During the next sections the physics underlying the phenomenon of phase separation is dis-
cussed, together with simple models for its description. After this, some functional roles of phase
separation in cells are presented.

1.1.1   The description of LLPS phenomena
    Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) is a well-known phase transition that can occur in mul-
ticomponent mixtures and depends on the interactions between elements in the system. It is a
reversible energetically favorable (what means spontaneous) process of demixing and, results in
division into two phases (Fig. 1.1), which differ by component concentrations: One is polymer
rich, the other is solvent rich [174].




Figure 1.1 – Differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy image of phase separation of
biopolymers [133].

    The global free energy of the system contains entropic and enthalpic contributions.

                                       ∆G f ree = ∆H − T ∆S


                                                 3


Chapitre 1. Introduction

    Spontaneous demixing is associated with a decrease of the free energy that can be achieved by
either decreasing enthalpy (enthalpic driven phase separation) or entropy (entropic driven phase
separation). So, phase separation can be divided into two types by the driving force.

1.1.2   Enthalpy driven phase separation
    In the ideal mixture, the interaction energy is not changed, so only an entropic contribution
exists and the mixture is always homogeneous. For a binary system, for example, polymer-solvent,
the energy of mixing per site is:
                                          φ
                              ∆Fmix = kT ( lnφ + (1 − φ )ln(1 − φ ))
                                          N
where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, φ is volume fraction and N is the polymer
length relative to the solvent. As φ is always <1, ln(φ ) is always negative, ∆Fmix has only negative
contributions, favouring demixing. In non-ideal mixtures interactions between components exist
and they can be either attractive or repulsive. In order to make the phase separation energetically
favorable enthalpy contribution has to eliminate the contribution of the entropy to minimise the
total energy [180].
    The classical model to describe phase separation thermodynamically was proposed indepen-
dently in 1941-1942 by Flory and Huggins [62, 96]. It is a mean-field lattice-base description that
assumes that molecules in the solution are linear, constant in size and are placed on the nodes of
the lattice, each node is occupied by one of the components, in the simplest case A (solution) and
B (polymer) as presented on Fig. 1.2. Polymer B has a length NB and occupies volume VB , then
for solution NA = 1, and volume VA . Volume fractions for each of the components are φA = VAV+V   A
                                                                                                    B
and φB = VAV+VB
                B
                  .




Figure 1.2 – Schematic illustration of the on-lattice model of mixing process. The mixture of two
components: polymers (black) and solvent (grey) is shown.

    The main invention of the Flory-Huggins model is Flory interacting parameter:
                                           z 2uAB + uAA + uBB
                                     χ=
                                           2       kT
where uXX are interacting energies between A and B components, z is the number of neighbors.
This parameter can be used to calculate the additional contribution to the energy of mixing which
is χφ (1 − φ )kT . It represents the average energy associated with polymer-solvent interactions. A
detailed analysis of the Flory-Haggins model, the application to experimental data and determina-
tion of the Flory parameter is presented in Chapter 2.


                                                 4


                                                                 1.1. Phase separation as a zeitgeist

     One can notice that this model is dependant on the volume fraction of the components in a non-
trivial way. Actually, the energy of mixing along φ value varies for phase separating system and
demixing is spontaneous only in a particular range of φ . Plotting it together with the temperature
dependency summarises the mixture behaviors into a phase diagram, an example is presented on
Fig. 1.3
     Based on a shape of a phase diagram two types of phase separating systems can be distingui-
shed: With an upper critical solution temperature (UCST) and a lower critical solution temperature
(LCST). In Flory-Huggins theory they are distinguished by the sign of the Flory parameter: UCST
has a positive one, LCST has a negative one (Fig. 1.3).




Figure 1.3 – Phase diagran with an upper or lower critical solution temperature (UCST or LCST,
respectively) [133].



Enthalpic phase separation in biological systems
    In biological systems phase separation is triggered by heteropolymers: Proteins and nucleic
acids (RNA and DNA). Proteins which are involved in the formation of droplets share some com-
mon features. First, such proteins usually contain disordered regions, if not fully disordered, se-
cond, they represent multivalency.
    Going through the known examples of protein systems which phase separate one can notice
that either the determined multiple binding sites between the components exist (heterotypic do-
main motif systems) or it is organised out of IDPs which phase separate via homotypic interactions
with each other.

Heterotypic systems
     Such systems are usually composed of two or more scaffold molecules. The interaction bet-
ween protein/RNA/DNA chains is essential for the phase transition and in order to form a network
at least three are required. Participants in biomolecular condensates can be classified into separate
classes by the number of binding sites (Fig. 1.4). Those which have a valency higher or equal to
three are classified as "nodes" as they actually form a network. Those which have valency equal
to two are classified as "bridges" as they can connect the higher valency particles or groups but do
not increase the valency of the system, one binding site particles are classified as "caps" as they
terminate the binding site and reduce interacting capacity. And finally, those which do not have
interacting sites are classified as "bystanders" [185].


                                                 5


Chapitre 1. Introduction




Figure 1.4 – Network-based classification of the droplet components. Valence (v) of the biocon-
densate member: v = 0 (bystander), v = 1 (cap) ; v = 2 (bridge), v>2 (node) [185].


    Heterotypic interactions are represented with a specific interaction between molecules and
often involve folded domains, one of the example is RNA-binding domain (RRM) or protein bin-
ding domain SH3 [87], but disordered motifs which perform specific binding also exist in such
systems (RGG motif) [36]. In order to maintain multivalency several binding sites must be present
on the molecule. This can be either achieved by sequential or a parallel connections of binding
sites. An example of two distinct nucleolar subcompartments with parallel connections [58] and
cytoplasmic biocondensates formed by sequentially connected interacting domains (Fig. 1.5) [87].




Figure 1.5 – (a) An example of parallel binding site connection [58] ; (b) sequential binding site
connection [87].

    Binding sites comprising molecule multivalency can be either identical or different in terms of
their affinity or even interact with different partners. All this affects phase separation and defines
the phase diagram [218].
    In order to to better understand phase separation, experimental data can be liked to the phy-
sical model. The concept of a "sticker-spacer" representation, identifying interacting and non-
interacting components of the system, of phase separation proteins is becoming popular. A soft-
ware LASSI (LAttice simulation engine for Sticker and Spacer Interactions) was specially desi-
gned for this concept and allows to calculate phase diagrams for multicomponent systems [35].
LASSI allows to vary architecture of the molecule, the affinity of binding sites, linkers length


                                                  6


                                                                 1.1. Phase separation as a zeitgeist

and also its solvation volume what can modulate phase separation as well and allows to describe
experimental data [87].


Homotypic systems

    Single IDPs usually act as a scaffold for homotypic systems, the most studied examples are
FUS [208] and Ddx4 [21]. The amino acid content is usually rich with charged, aromatic amino
acids and glycine [133]. Four groups of interactions can be distinguished: electrostatic interactions
which include charged and dipolar interactions, π-π and cation-π interactions (Fig. 1.6) [159]. Of
course, hydrophobic contacts can be also involved in the formation of the network, in particular
phase separating proteins are rich with hydrophobic amino acids, and their properties will be
discussed further.




Figure 1.6 – (a) Types of molecular interactions underlying intracellular phase transitions [159] ;
(b) possible amino acid contacts which stabilise phase separation [116].

     Different contacts between amino acids can be formed: Via oppositely charged residues (K/R
and E/D) ; P,Y,H and T are involved in π-π and cation -π interactions, and polar contacts with (A-
A, P-P, S–S, and Y–Y) (Fig. 1.6). Different pairs of amino acids make different strength contacts,
for instance, replacing tyrosine with phenylalanine and arginine to lysine in FUS protein increases
the saturation concentration, the critical concentration after which the phase separation occurs. A
similar tendency was observed by decreasing the number of tyrosine and arginine residues [208].
     Such systems can also be represented with a "sticker-sticker" model where interacting amino
acids are stickers with a small radius and non-interacting amino acids such as glycin represent
spacers [116]. The "Sticker-spacer" model does not take into account interaction with solvent,
this could be overcome by modeling solvent as another interacting molecule with a low valency.
However, it is impossible to introduce the contribution of entropy in such a model [19].


1.1.3   Entropy driven phase separation
    Even though macromolecule content in droplets is very high (protein concentration is estima-
ted to be around ~400 mg/ml) water concentration is still more than 60% which corresponds to at


                                                 7


Chapitre 1. Introduction

least 33 M [21]. The entropic contribution to the system is mostly coming from the solvent and
underlining the importance of solvent in phase separation.
    Water around macromolecules can be subdivided into groups by layers (Fig. 1.7): The layer
closer to the solute (hydration H2 O), the second hydration shells (extended hydration H2 O) and
the rest further away (bulk H2 O) which, following the most widely accepted model, binds four
other molecules in a tetrahedral structure via H bonds in the liquid state making a 3D network,
however, the average lifetime of the network is in the range 1–8 ps, Fig. 1.7 [174].




Figure 1.7 – Water classification in the solution. Hydration and bulk water around the solute [174].

    Bulk water has a major contribution in the entropy in the dilute solute regime, however, in
droplets the protein concentration is so high that the contribution that is classically identified as
"hydration water" is becoming considerable as well.
    An alternative to Flory-Huggins theory of phase separation is the theory of H2 O structure
alteration originally formulated by Zaslavsky [224]. It proposes that polymers alter the structure
and dynamics of H2 O to the point that it forms two different and mutually incompatible H2 O
phases. In general, H2 O is more ordered around a protein’s surface to the bulk, increasing the
entropy and promotes demixing [205]. Also, hydrated water dynamics was shown to be slower
(9 ps) in comparison with the bulk (2 ps) [202]. All this shows a decrease in entropy of water
molecules which hydrate the polymer.
    Some proteins with a high content of hydrophobic amino acids but low charged and aromatic
amino acid content can also phase separate and interestingly, phase diagrams associated with such
systems tend to exhibit an LCST. One of such polymers is elastin-like polypeptide (ELP). It is
proposed that water molecules form a hydration shell around hydrophobic side chains and the
release of the solvent into the bulk results in the increase of entropy and the collapse of polymer
chains. The increase of the temperature weakens H-bonds making this process more favorable
at higher temperature resulting in an LCST phase diagram [133]. ELP is an interesting example
on which the transition between LCST to UCST was shown by the replacement of hydrophobic
residues with charged residues [166]. This proves the hypothesis described above.
    To conclude, both enthalpy and entropy can be responsible for phase separation, probably the
characteristics of systems and the shape of their phase diagram differ because of the driving forces
which initiate phase separation. It should be mentioned, that the entropy loss due to the restrictions
on the polymer chain structure and dynamics were not discussed here. In order to be able to predict
phase separation conditions this contribution has to be taken into account as well. That requires an


                                                  8


                                                                                  1.2. Measles virus

understanding of the difference in protein state between two phases what is the subject of Chapter
5.


1.1.4   The role of phase separation in biology
    Membraneless organelles provide an alternative mechanism of intracellular compartmentali-
sation. In comparison with the membrane organelles they can be smaller (less than 1 µm), can
be assembled and disassembled, gelates and recover dynamic liquid behavior, for example, on
the response of chemical stress [80]. Inside droplets chemical reactions can be accelerated due to
the increase of local concentration of the components, or sequester by selectively excluding some
components. Using the selective permeability, which can be changed, the activity of the reaction is
regulated and altered [149]. As it was already mentioned such organelles can become more or less
dynamic, for instance in the nucleus ; chromatin undergoes such transitions, which allows regula-
ting gene activity [3]. Chemical reactions in the cytoplasm are affected by biocondensates as well.
Signaling molecules or some of the components can be harvested inside droplets and be released
in response of stress [89]. As droplets are formed at the critical concentration of the component,
they can also be used by the cell to buffer concentrations of proteins in the cytoplasm. One of the
recent studies showed that after protein concentration in the cell reaches a critical level, the noise
in cytoplasmic concentration variation is becoming much weaker [113].
    A number of reviews which discuss biocondensates roles exist [5, 6, 149]. Their vital role in
viral cycles is discussed below in section 1.4 and is the subject of Chapter 3.




1.2     Measles virus
1.2.1   The disease
    Measles is one of the most contagious infectious airborne diseases caused by the Measles
virus (MeV), which infects memory B and T lymphocytes and macrophage cells. Before vaccina-
tion was introduced in 1960s/1970s, virtually everyone experienced the disease during childhood
[39]. The incubation period of measles is about 10-12 days after which initial symptoms of the di-
sease appear: high fever, runny nose, cough, and skin rash, which is a signature of measles [215].
Measles is at its highest contagious level from 4 days before to 4 days after the rash onset. Despite
a relatively low mortality rate, there is a list of serious side effects caused by measles: Immunosup-
pression, pneumonia, gastroenteritis, blindness, measles inclusion body encephalitis, and subacute
sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE). The latter is a rare complication of measles, which causes chro-
nic progressive brain inflammation after 7-10 years of an initial infection, death occurring within
1 to 3 years [177].
    In the pre-vaccination era, 30 million cases and >2 million deaths occurred each year globally.
Besides, MeV was associated with up to 50% of all childhood deaths, mostly because of other
infectious diseases, possibly due to the immune suppression caused by measles [139]. Despite the
existence of a vaccine, measles is still common in many regions, including Europe, and affects
about 7 million people every year with approximately 100 000 deaths globally [215]. Measles
contagious rate is extremely high. The estimated reproductive number R0 , the average number of
secondary cases of infectious disease, is usually estimated between 12 to 18, however, the value
can vary between 4 and 50 depending on the way it is estimated. This means that each person
with measles, on average, infects 12–18 other people. To stop viral transmission, the population
has to be covered more than the herd-immunity threshold, which can be found with an equation:
p = 1 − 1/R0 which is higher than 90% for MeV [79]. Currently, there is no specific antiviral


                                                  9


Chapitre 1. Introduction

treatment against measles.
    Measles is believed to have evolved from an ancestral zoonotic virus that was transmitted
from cattle around the 6th century BCE. Animal domestication occurred several centuries earlier,
and the transmission of this ancestral virus between cattle and humans was possible, however,
apparently a critical community size is required to support continuous MeV transmission. Measles
virus separation from a zoonotic ancestor coincided with the rise of urban centers throughout
Eurasia, South and East Asia which reached a critical size around the 6th century BCE. For measles
the critical community size is estimated to be between 250,000 to 500,000 [52].
    One of the consequences of MeV infection is a loss of immune memory. Following a contrac-
tion of the disease, a decrease in interferon signaling, cytokine response, lymphopenia, and sup-
pression of lymphocyte proliferation was shown [120, 177]. What is more, immune memory cells
seem to be affected as well. In a recent study, antibody levels before and after patients experienced
measles were measured, and between 11 and 73% of the antibody repertoires were shown to be
eliminated. During the disease, up to 70% of memory cells, including both B cells and T cells
can be infected where measles replication impairs immune memory, resulting in “immunological
amnesia”. Notably, such effects were not observed on vaccinated individuals [139].
    Measles virus has been studied for decades, the symptoms, virion structure and the life cycle
are known. Its proteins are used as models to characterise Paramyxoviruses, which include Hendra
and Nipah - deadly human pathogens, and to better understand general mechanisms of viruses.
However, many processes remain unknown, especially viral replication. In order to understand the
process of viral genome reproduction and its regulation, not only the structure of the protein has to
be solved, but it should be put in the context of other proteins and nucleic acids, the kinetics of the
processes should be revealed. Finally, viral regulation in cells has to be investigated. In Chapters
3 and 4 the progress in understanding these questions is presented.


1.2.2   Viral cycle
    MeV is a member of the Paramyxoviridae family, Mononegavirales order. Its genome consists
of non-segmented negative-strand RNA, which encodes eight proteins from six genes: N, P, L,
H, F and M (Fig.1.8). The P gene encodes two additional proteins whose expression involves
different frameshifts : V protein and C protein. The virion is an enveloped particle which contains
the genome, covered with copies of N protein, in complex with P and L. M is associated with the
membrane, H and the F are membrane proteins which are exposed on the surface of the virion
(Fig. 1.9) [106] [177].



Figure 1.8 – Structure of viral genome. Linear negative sense single-strand RNA starts with a
leader sequence on the 3’-end, followed by protein genes and terminated with a trailer sequence
on 5’-end.

     H recognises CD150/SLAM receptor which is expressed on the surface of T and B cells,
macrophages and dendritic cells. Nectin 4, which is expressed at adherens junctions of epithelia,
is a second major cellular receptor which H protein recognises [200] ; [143]. Then F protein fuses
viral and cellular membranes and initiates the infection. F protein can also infect neighboring cells
by fusing them together and results in multinucleated cells, termed “syncytia”, which is a hallmark
of many other paramyxoviruses [160]. After nucleocapsids (NC) are released into the cytoplasm
of the target cells they serve as a template for both transcription and replication. The viral cycle is
summarized in Fig. 1.9 [106].
     The MeV replication machinery consists of viral RNA covered by nucleoproteins (N), termed
the nucleocapsid (NC) that protects the genome against the host cell immune system, the Large


                                                  10


                                                                                 1.2. Measles virus




Figure 1.9 – The structure of MeV virion (left) and the schematic representation of viral life cycle
(rigth). MeV genome together with N form a helical nucleocapsid (NC) that is associated with
L and P proteins. H and F proteins are incorporated into the lipid envelope that is derived from
the host cell membrane. M protein interacts with both the NC and the cytoplasmic tails of F, and
promotes virion assembly. MeV viral life cycle: Following the binding of the H protein to the
host receptor and membrane fusion with the help of F, viral NC releases into the host cytoplasm.
Replication and transcription of the viral genome take place in the cytoplasm. Newly synthesized
NC and other viral proteins are transported to the plasma membrane. M protein interacts with NC,
the cytoplasmic tails of the H protein and the F protein, the cell membrane and actin filaments what
promote virus assembly [177].


protein (L), the viral RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase (RdRP), and its essential co-factor, Phos-
phoprotein (P) [176]. As the replication process plays a vital role in viral reproduction, a detailed
description of its molecular mechanisms is indispensable for the design of anti-viral treatments.
    Initially, viral polymerase synthetises mRNAs for translation of new viral proteins. At some
point it switches to the replication of viral anti-genomic full length RNAs, followed by a second
cycle resulting in genomic copies. Once new copies of a viral genome are synthesised and encap-
sidated they are transported to the plasma membrane for M protein mediated virion assembly and
budding. In contrast to many viruses, MeV does not use cellular ESCRT system for budding [106],
[177].

Interaction with host factors
     Viral metabolism requires the involvement of multiple host proteins. For instance, Hsp72 is
implicated in the replication process [30]. Casein kinase II and PIM 3 kinase are responsible for
MeV phosphorylation of N and P proteins [43, 199]. Also the cellular cytoskeleton is essential for
viral replication and trafficking, assembly and budding [142]. In addition, cellular mRNA trans-
lation is inhibited by MeV N via its interaction with eIF3. This consequently promotes stress
granules (SG) formation and silencing cellular mRNAs [186].

Cellular immune response
    Uncapped ssRNA (with a 5-triphosphate) is a virus-specific feature which is used by the cell
to recognise the infection. The retinoic acid-inducible gene I protein (RIG-I)-like receptors and


                                                 11


Chapitre 1. Introduction

melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5) are two main sensors which recognise
MeV RNAs. RIG-I is an activating kinase which phosphorylates interferon regulatory factors.
Interferon activates the Janus kinase (JAK)–signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
signaling pathway, stimulating the transcription of various antiviral genes. P, V and C proteins were
shown to be involved in the inhibition of the host interferon responses, probably by interacting with
initial sensory proteins and blocking JAK-STAT signaling pathways [177].




1.3    MeV replication machinery
    As described above MeV replication requires three proteins : L - large protein, which is res-
ponsible for the polymerisation reaction, N - nucleoprotein, which forms a template together with
viral genome and P - phosphoprotein, an essential co-factor. In the following sections, the structure
of all the components is discussed, together with their possible conformational rearrangements as-
sociated with function. In addition, interactions between components of the replication machinery
are introduced together with their functional roles.

Phosphoprotein

    P is a multifunctional protein whose sequence varies significantly over the Mononegavirales
order, but whose architecture and functional roles are conserved. P of MeV is a 507 amino acid
protein which has a multi-domain structure with alternating ordered and disordered regions (Fig.
1.10 (a) ). It starts with a long disordered tail (304 amino acids, Ptail ) followed by an oligomerisa-
tion domain (OD) of four long parallel helices between residues 304 and 377. At the C-terminus
of P there is another folded domain (XD) (residues 457-507) which is linked to the tetramerization
domain via the unfolded Ploop (residues 377-457). Structures of folded domains were previously
solved using X-ray crystallography and Ptail was recently characterised in our laboratory using
NMR and SAXS [137].




Figure 1.10 – (a) A schematic representation of the structure of MeV P protein. Bars corresponds
to structural regions, lines to disordered regions ; (b) crystal structure of MeV tetramerisation
domain (PDB 3ZDO) ; (c) crystal structure of a complex between the linear helical motif of Ntail
and the XD of P (PDB 1T6O) ; (d) a comparison of P structures from different viruses. Bars
corresponds to structural regions, lines to disordered regions, "-" indicates acidic region in Ptail .
(e) Localization of secondary structure propensity and representation of flexibility/rigidity of Ptail
with colors from red (flexible) to blue (rigid) and the transient α-helices from the N-terminal helix
(α1 to α4).

    The oligomerisation domain is composed of four parallel α-helices interacting via hydropho-


                                                  12


                                                                     1.3. MeV replication machinery

bic contacts and was solved using X-ray crystallography (Fig. 1.10 (b)). The sequence consists
of repetitions of the classical coiled-coil pattern comprising segments of seven amino acids, "a-
b-c-d-e-f-g", in which the residues in positions "a" and "d" are usually hydrophobic and esta-
blish interaction between helices. This long hydrophobic contact determines high stability of the
complex (melting temperature was estimated to be of 85°C), probably to avoid the presence of
monomer-tetramer equilibrium. The helices are interrupted by a kink which appears near three
leucine residues (L339 L340 L341) [37]. This kink was shown to be required to support viral gene
expression and is conserved in oligomerisation domains across the Paramyxoviridae family [16].
    The C-terminal domain, called XD, is a folded domain formed by a three helical bundle. Its
structure was solved in complex with a C-terminal helix of N (see section 1.1.7, Fig. 1.10 (c)).
Using NMR, XD was also shown to form three -helices in solution in the absence of Ntail .
    Ptail is the largest domain of P (304 amino acids). The length of the architecturally conserved
disordered N-terminal domain varies from 93 (for Rabies) to 470 (for Nipah) across Mononega-
lovirus order (Fig. 1.10 (d)) MeV Ptail was described using solution NMR and was shown to be
mostly disordered, however, the first 37 residues form two transient α-helices which interact with
Ncore (see section 1.1.7). Using spin relaxation two other regions along Ptail were found to have
propensities to form short helices: residues 87-93 (α3) and 189-198 (α4), (Fig. 1.10 (e)) [137].
The region between α3 to α4 is also highly charged making a long acidic loop. Such sequence
features are conserved along Ptail in other viruses, for example, Nipah, PIV5, VSV, RSV, Rabies (
Fig. 1.10 (d)).
    Finally, another disordered region is situated between the oligomerisation domain and XD -
Ploop . This was the only part of P which structure was not characterised prior to the work presented
here, and its characterisation using NMR can be found in Chapter 3.


1.3.1   L protein structure
     L protein is the longest protein of measles, but the least abundant, as its mRNA is transcribed
last. The level of protein abundance is controlled by gradient transcription: Polymerase always
starts with a 3’-end of the genome and in between genes it releases from the template in the
junctions with a certain probability, for example for VSV transcript level is reduced by 20% at
each junction [99]. So, the later the gene is placed on the genome, the less it is transcribed. MeV
L is a 2183 amino acid long protein which structure was not solved yet, however, the structures of
homologous viruses are known.
     L is responsible for the synthesis of viral genomic RNA and mRNA what requires not only
RNA transcription but also such modifications as capping, methylation and polyadenylation. By
homology with recently determined structures (see below) we can hypothesize that these functions
are all carried out by different domains of the enzyme: the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRp), the mRNA capping domain, and a methyltransferase domain (MT). In addition, L is
thought to comprise a connector domain (CD) and C-terminal domain (CTD) and two disordered
regions acting as linkers (Fig. 1.11) [127].
     L is responsible for genome replication which is initiated at a certain viral life cycle stage and
requires some changes in the polymerase activity: Avoidance of capping, ignorance of junction
regions to synthesise a full-length anti-genome and later genome RNA [1]. To sum it up, L is a
multifunctional protein which must exist in several conformations depending on whether mRNA
or a genomic RNA is synthesised. Each of these processes also requires L to be highly dynamic to
switch between initiation, elongation and termination stages.
     Until recently, the structure of L had only been solved for vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV),
an NNRV of the Rhabdovirus family, but lately several other structures have been determined
on an atomic revolution in complex with P by Cryo-Electron Microscopy (Cryo-EM) [1, 27, 73,
94, 101, 127, 154]. L has a right-hand, “fingers-palm-thumb” structure similar to other RNA and
DNA polymerases. Interestingly, different domains of P have been located in the complex with L


                                                  13


Chapitre 1. Introduction




Figure 1.11 – (a) A schematic representation of the structure of MeV L protein. (b) The comparison
of L protein structure of PIV5 and VSV. PIV5 structure corresponds to the transcription mode, VSV
- to the replication mode [1].


for different viruses: For VSV and rabies virus (RABV), the full length L protein was visualized
in complex with the N-terminal part of P with the resolutions of the structures being 3.0 Å and 3.3
Å, respectively [94, 101, 127]. The binding of P occurred on the C-terminal of L, which has also
been described to be the binding site of SeV P by mutational analysis ([194]). Such alternating
interactions of P may stabilise L in different sub-conformations and regulate activity.
    For VSV and RABV the phosphoprotein has been observed to lock the CD, MT, and CTD
domains into a stabilized conformation with respect to the RdRp-CAP module, leading to a reor-
ganization of the structure (Fig. 1.11). When L alone is visualized by negative stain EM, the
polymerase architecture resembles a doughnut, the C-terminal domains (CD, MT and CTD) were
seen hovering on top of it. Binding of P to the linker segments at the ends of the CD leads to
a rearrangement of the overall conformation and the capping domain folds back on the ring-like
domain [127, 167, 168]. Overall, the structures of VSV L in complex with N-terminal of P was
assumed to correspond to its initiation state and for RABV to elongation state by the conformation
of the RdRp domain [95, 127].
    Despite, it has been observed that the N-terminal half of the L protein is responsible for the
L-P interaction while the C-terminal half has been found not essential for the polymerase structure
stabilization for PIV5, MeV, SeV, HPIV3, hMPV and RSV [27, 33, 73, 93, 130, 154, 156], for
other viruses, L has been found in complex with the C-terminal of P. For parainfluenza virus 5
(PIV5), the full length L has been observed with 4.3 Å resolution in complex with the C-terminal
fragments of the phosphoprotein including the oligomerization and XD domains. But due to the
poor observed density, a crystal structure of P OD was modeled to fill in the lack of information
([1]). The MTase active site is placed on top of the PRNTase domain, resulting in a much closer
distance between the conserved HR motif and the active site of 25.7 Å, rather than 52.5 Å in the
VSV structure (grey dashed lines on Fig. 1.11 (b)). Because of the proximity of the MTase active
site to the HR motif, a conserved motif required for polyribonucleotidyltransferase activity, the
conformation observed in PIV5 structure was speculated to represent a transcriptionally competent
form of the polymerase [1], while VSV structure could correspond to the replication form.
    The longest modeled fragment of P bound on the surface of L was around 100 residues for
RSV and 80 for hMPV [27, 73, 154]. Due to the intrinsically disordered nature of P, the fragments
that are not bound to L are not structured and cannot be visualized successfully. Therefore, there
is no information for the whole organization of the phosphoprotein in relation to L.


                                                14


                                                                   1.3. MeV replication machinery

     Despite all existing data about viral replication machinery structure and interactions, the re-
gulation of its activity, switch between transcription and replication, the mechanism by which L
uncoats N in order to interact with the RNA remain unclear [1, 27, 94, 101, 127]. Probably, P
is strongly involved in the conformational regulation of L what controls its activity. Multiple in-
teractions between different parts of P and L are shown, for instance, a bipartite interaction has
been found for MeV L and P where OD and XD bind at two independent sites of L ([162]). What
controls and regulates L-P interactions still has to be explored.



1.3.2   Nucleoprotein

    N can be present in an RNA-free, or monomeric, form and in an RNA-bound form – NC.
The monomeric structure can be subdivided into a folded Ncore formed by N-terminal 400 amino
acid and disordered Ntail , C-terminal 125 amino acid which additionally contains a linear motif
with α-helical propensity (residues 488-499) (Fig. 1.12). In solution protein sequence folds into
several helices of different length that exchange with each other and with a purely unfolded form
on timescales faster than microseconds [37, 102, 103].




Figure 1.12 – (a) A schematic representation of the structure of MeV N protein. (b) MeV NC
structure solved by Cryo-EM (PDB 4UFT), alternating colors correspond to different copies of
N ; (c) the structure of N0 P (PDB number 4CO6) Narm (left) and the C-arm (right) are shown
with the dash, the region of P is shown in red.


    Ncore is flanked by disordered N and C-arms in the RNA-free form of the protein and becomes
more structured upon binding to the neighboring Ncore subunits in NC.
    Once N protein is expressed in cells it directly binds to the cellular RNA and forms NC [134].
A chimeric protein was designed in order to obtain a monomeric N: It contains the first 50 residues
of P followed by N (Ncore or Nfull can be used) with a TEV-cleavage site in between. Such construct
is called N0 P [136]. As mentioned above, the N-terminus of P forms two α-helices which bind to
Ncore and chaperone it in a monomeric form. Expressing such a chimeric construct, the structure
of RNA-free N was solved using crystallography (N and C-arms were also deleted to enhance
crystallisation). The folded part of N is composed of two lobes with the RNA binding site located
in a groove in between these lobes [222].


                                                15


Chapitre 1. Introduction

1.3.3   N and RNA interaction: nucleocapsid formation
    N, together with RNA assembles into long helical structures - NC. The structure of NCs as-
sembled around random cellular RNA was solved using Cryo-EM, however, because they were
assembled around heterogeneous cellular RNA the electron density of the different RNA bases
was averaged. In addition, the disordered Ntail was digested by trypsin, which resulted in straight
NCs which was essential for solving the structure [83]. The comparison of this structure with the
structure of monomeric Ncore in complex with N-terminal P shows a global conformational change
and reveals the mechanism of P1-50 chaperone activity: The binding site of P1-50 on N overlaps with
the binding sites of N-arm and C-arm, which are involved in NC stabilisation. Despite the relati-
vely high resolution (3.5 Å) of the folded part of capsid, it lacked information about RNA bases
and Ntail .




Figure 1.13 – Structure of the 5 viral genomic RNA (HO-ACCAGA-OH) inside the NC. (a) The
Cryo-EM electrostatic potential of the six bases at the 5 end of the viral RNA inside the NC (EM
data base EMD-0142) which forms A-helix with a turn every three nb. (b) RNA is squeezed between
the two halves of N. The figure shows some of the residues binding the RNA, in red those that bind
the bases [82].

     An engineered N0 P construct can therefore be exploited to prevent the assembly process during
protein expression. N0 P can be purified in a nucleotide-free form, and addition of RNA leads to
assembly of N onto the RNA and therefore NC formation [136]. In vitro NC assembly from N0 P al-
lows control of the sequence of RNA inside NCs and also controls assembly initiation,contributing
to a better understanding of the assembly process on a molecular level. Using in vitro assembly
one can obtain NC with homogeneous RNA sequence, using Cryo-EM and helical reconstruction
its structure was obtained at higher resolution with electron density that was also better resolved,
allowing identification of contacts between nucleotides and amino acids of Ncore [47].
     First, a global structural change during RNA binding was found: The angle between the upper
and the lower lobes of Ncore differ by 20◦ , assembled N adopts a "closed" conformation squeezing
RNA in between. In addition it is suggested that the α6 helix which forms a lower lip of RNA
binding pocket, exhibits high intrinsic flexibility, facilitating accommodation of different RNA
sequences.


                                                16


                                                                     1.3. MeV replication machinery

    Using a known RNA sequence for structure determination revealed a number of contacts bet-
ween RNA and N. K180, T183, R194, and R195 residues were identified previously [83], although
the nature of the interactions were revealed, for example, bifurcation between backbone and base
interactions with the sidechain R195, additionally, Q202, E263 and N351 were proposed to be
involved in interaction [47]. The contacts are shown on Fig. 1.13.
    In the NC structure each N subunit binds to exactly six nucleobases, explaining why MeV
genome length is a multiple of 6. While binding RNA backbone adapts a certain conformation:
Nucleotides on 1st and 2nd positions pointing out of the NC, making their bases solvent accessible,
then first flip accrues, bases 3–5 are pointing toward the protein surface and after the second flip
base six is pointing out. Bases in between flips (6-1-2 and 3-4-5) stack in the A-form conformation.
    In the structure presented by Desfosses et al. NC was formed in complex with six base RNA
lacking the 6th phosphate group, so the structure also verified that the binding register was main-
tained throughout the entire capsid. One can notice that in the shown NC structure the first three
nucleotides at the 3’-end are exposed to the solvent, making them accessible for the interaction
with the polymerase. This can be a possible initial recognition and binding site followed by RNA
uncoating and transcription [47].


1.3.4   Kinetics of NCs assembly
     The monomeric form of N allows the study of the kinetics of the NC assembly process which
is illustrated in Fig. 1.14. Several methods can be used to study it from the side of RNA or from
the side of the protein.
     Using fluorescently labeled RNA the kinetics can be studied as a function of changing fluores-
cent anisotropy. Short RNA molecules have a fast rotational diffusion exhibiting low anisotropy.
Once they are bound to N they experience an increase in anisotropy with further growth during as-
sembly. So, by measuring fluorescence at a certain wavelength with alternating filter polarization
before detection, the anisotropy can be calculated and the assembly rate extracted. An example of
how such an approach can be applied to study the assembly is presented in [136].
     To study the assembly from the side of the protein, NMR spectroscopy can be used. This
allows to follow the process at residue specific resolution. As a reminder, the N0 P complex which
is used for in vitro assembly is composed of a short region of P (1-50) bound to Ncore , which
are both not observed in 1 H-15 N HSQC spectra and disordered arms which are present on the
spectra (a construct with Ntail can be used as well, in this case Ntail is also present on the spectra)
[47, 136]. The example of such spectra is shown on Fig. 1.14. During assembly, P1-50 releases,
becoming observable on HSQC spectra, while the arms bind to the neighboring Ncore s such that
their intensity drops (as a population weighted average between visible and invisible signals).
Measuring a series of HSQC spectra during the assembly process allows to follow the intensities
of peaks corresponding to P1-50 and to the arms and to determine the assembly rates.
     Finally, NC imaging can be done with negative stain EM. Samples incubated for a different
time with RNA show an increase in the length of NCs.


1.3.5   Multiple interactions between N and P
    Several interactions between N and P are known in the literature, they include different do-
mains and are present during different viral life cycle stages. The interactome of N and P is pre-
sented on Fig. 1.15.
    First, as described above, the N-terminus of P (1-37) binds to Ncore and maintains it in a
RNA-free form by preventing self-interaction between N and C-arms and Ncore . This interaction
is present through Mononegavirales order via a conserved N-terminal motif, and has been called
"soyuz1" [108]. This motif is placed in a hypervariable region (Ptail ), that remains hydrophobic
with a high helical propensity.


                                                  17


Chapitre 1. Introduction




Figure 1.14 – Kinetics of the assembly of NC and methods to follow it: NMR, fluorescence and EM.
When RNA was added to the N0 P complex, NC assembly could be followed by NMR in real time
because the NMR signals for the P peptide appear over time, by fluorescence anisotropy using
fluorescein amidite-labeled RNAs, and by negative staining EM showing the nucleocapsids [82].


     As mentioned above, the C terminal domain of P (XD) also interacts with N via a disordered
Ntail through a linear recognition element with a helical propensity. XD binding region of Ntail is
separated from Ncore by approximately 90 amino acids and appears as a transient helical structure
in the free form, and folds upon binding to XD [1]. This interaction between P and N was specu-
lated to be required for bringing L polymerase, which binds to the tetramerisation domain of P, in
close proximity to NCs and therefore to the RNA [15]. As P does not interact with RNA, it pro-
bably plays the role of a connector between replication machinery components. This interaction
is conserved along viruses highlighting its importance, although the actual role remains unclear
[108].
     Recently, a novel interaction between Ptail and Ncore was found. It includes transient helix α4
 191
( HELL194 ) from the side of Ptail and the lower lobe of N. This second interaction between Ptail
and Ncore was shown to be required for maintaining proper function of N in MeV. The deletion
of the interaction abolished viral transcription and replication in the cell. As this interaction is
extremely weak (around 600 µM) it is difficult to detect using classical biophysical techniques.
However, sequence similarities where found across paramyxoviridae, including Nipah and Sendai
virus [137].


1.3.6   Phosphorylation
    Phosphorylation modifications of both N and P are known in measles. Ptail is phosphorylated at
the positions S86 and S151 and regulates transcription efficiency. Initially, the kinase involved in
phosphorylation was identified - Casein Kinase 2 (CK2). These three serines were predicted to be
phosphorylated by CK2 : S86, S151 and S180. These three serines were tested for phophorylation
by mutagenesis using autoradiography and 32 P-labeled proteins, only the first two were confirmed


                                                18


                                                                                1.4. Viral factories




Figure 1.15 – N : P interactome. (a) A schematic illustration of interactions between P (red) and
N (blue) regions. Folded domains are shown with red and blue color, regions with a transient
structure that folds upon binding to the partner are shown with light red and blue, IDRs are not
colored. (b) Structure of different P:N complexes (PDB 3ZDO, IT6O, 4CO6), three interactions
are highlighted.


[43]. Phosphorylation of these sites downregulates the viral transcriptional activity [198]. Phos-
phorylation of Ntail at the position S479 and S510 was shown also using 32 P-labeled proteins. Early
studies propose that these sites are phosphorylated by CK2 [84], however, recent studies show that
they are PIM3 kinase dependant. Phosphorylation of these sites is involved in the regulation of
viral gene expression and stability of viral genome RNA. PIM3 kinase co-localises with N in the
cellular cytoplasm in speckles [199]. Furthermore, Ncore domain was found to be phosphorylated
at T279. Mutation T279A in cellulo caused malfunctions in nucleocapsid assembly [197]. Nothing
is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying the regulatory role of phosphorylation in N
or P.
    MeV P phosphorylation is one of the subjects of this thesis and the recent progress is presented
in Chapter 4.




1.4    Viral factories
    Membraneless organelles play an important role in cellular biochemistry and are used for cell
compartmentalisation without a need of a membrane. They are formed via liquid-liquid phase
separation (LLPS) of scaffold proteins which usually contain IDRs and have multivalent interac-
tions what allow formation of a network where other proteins (client) can be attracted [192]. In
case of (-)ssRNA viral membranless organelles two proteins, apparently, play a role of a scaffold:
nucleoprotein (N) and phosphoprotein (P) what was recently shown for rabies, HMPV, HRSV and
SV5 [46, 69, 147, 164, 176]. At the beginning of my thesis the formation of such droplets had not
been proven in the case of MeV, although co-localization of N and P in the cytosol was a known
phenomenon since the 1970s [44]. Our work in vitro will be described in this thesis (see Chapter


                                                19


Chapitre 1. Introduction

3), but simultaneously to this work, N:P droplets were observed in vivo by [227].




Figure 1.16 – MeV biocondensates exhibit liquid properties in cellulo [227]. (a) N and P co-
localisation ; (b) fusion between two droplets ; (c) an example of FRAP experiment of MeV dro-
plets.

    Mononegavirales order includes 11 families and its members are characterised by linear non-
segmented negative-sense single-stranded RNA [8]. Their viral particles are enveloped structures
and are composed of 5 to 10 proteins. Viral membranless organelles were shown in cellulo for most
Mononegavirales families (Bornaviridae, Filoviridae, Paramyxoviridae, Pneumoviridae, Rhabdo-
viridae). The three proteins mentioned above (N, L and P), that together form the viral replication
machinery were found to co-localised in infected cells inside membraneless organelles [46, 90,
118, 151, 164, 176, 227]. This led to speculation that they are involved in the viral transcription
and replication processes.


1.4.1   Viral droplets require N and P for the formation and exhibits liquid proper-
        ties
     The necessity of N and P to form viral droplets was shown for a range of viruses: Rabies,
measles, Nipah, RSV [147, 151, 176, 227]. Overexpression of both N and P triggered droplet for-
mation which grew in size and number over time [118, 147, 227], an example of measles droplets
in the cellular environment is shown in Fig. 1.16 [227]. Such droplets exhibited properties cha-
racteristic for the liquid phase : spherical shape, ability to fuse associated with relaxation into a
spherical particle (Fig.1 1.16), exchange of components with the surrounding environment what
was shown using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (Fig. 1.16 C). Similar characteristics
were shown in cellulo for rabies and VSV [90, 147].
     The requirement of different N and P domains for droplet formation was tested on rabies and
it appeared that the minimum phase separating system was composed of a full length N together
with P starting with oligomerization domain, followed by Ploop and XD. While Ptail was apparently
not required for droplet formation, it plays an important role in N chaperoning (see above) and in-
teracts with cellular proteins which could selectively attract them inside droplets what is discussed
below. For some viruses (measles [227], Nipah [151]) over-expression of N on its own displays
phase separation as well, however, this can be also related to the instability of N protein without
chaperoning Ptail . The size of droplets was significantly smaller, so P appears to have a strong
positive effect. In the case of VSV, L protein was also required for droplets formation, however,
they were independent of the polymerization activity of L polymerase [90].


                                                 20


                                                                                  1.4. Viral factories

1.4.2   Multiple interactions between N and P
    It was speculated that the XD-Ntail interaction is required for bringing L, which also binds to P,
in a closer proximity to nucleocapsids and thus closer to RNA prior to transcription or replication.
The necessity of this interaction for the formation of viral droplets formation was shown for rabies
and measles [147]. Deletion of the XD domain suppressed phase separation in cellulo for rabies.
Deletions of XD [147] or Ntail transient helix [69, 226, 227] were previously shown to inhibit
droplet formation. This implies that XD-Ntail interaction is involved in the formation of a droplet
scaffold and replication is suppressed as a result of a dissolvent of viral factories.
    Apart from N: P interactions, the oligomeric state of P is probably also essential for droplet
formation making interactions with P multivalent. There are a number of examples of phase se-
parating proteins with sequential repeats of binding motives [164]. In the case of P, XD domains
are linked in parallel, what can be an advantage in terms of saving genome space, as the same
binding motif does not have to be coded in the genome several times. N also seems to have an
ability to oligomerise, it was mentioned that N can form inclusion bodies in cellulo on its own.
Additional evidence of N oligomerisation is present in S. Zhang et al. article, where the presence
of a small amount of non-defective N rescued the ability to form droplets and synthetize RNA,
and the defective N (interaction with P was suppressed by single point mutation) was present in
droplets as well [226].

1.4.3   Viral factories - replication in droplets
    Even thought only N and P are required for droplets formation, other viral proteins were shown
to be present inside droplets as well: L, C, V and also viral RNAs (genomic, antigenomic and
mRNA) [109, 118, 227] . In contrast to M and H which were shown to be excluded from the
droplets [56, 90, 109, 118].
    There is evidence that viral replication and transcription do take place in droplets. First, as
mentioned above all the components of replication machinery are present and concentrated in
droplets: N, P and L. Second, all types of viral RNA were found inside [69, 118, 226] and third,
the concentration of viral RNA increased in droplets after infection and was only detected in
droplets [176]. In addition, viral RNA was shown to be protected from RNAse action while it
is inside droplets, N concentration was proposed to be higher on the periphery of the droplet,
forming a potential mode of protection of the RNA [118]. In RSV protein concentration was also
shown to be inhomogeneously distributed in droplets. And once viral mRNA was synthesised,
it accumulates in a central part of the droplet together with M protein and translation initiation
proteins (PABP and eIF4G), N, P, L and genomic RNA are excluded from this region. Probably,
this sub-compartment is required for mRNA storage, by analogy with stress granules [176].

1.4.4   Client proteins
    Viral droplets exhibit selective permeability. Some cellular proteins were found to accumu-
late inside viral factories, for instance WD5 [227], Hsp70 [118], Hsp72 [29, 109, 145], FAK
[64], PABP, eIF4G [176], PI4KB [126], ubiquitinated proteins [118], others are excluded - TIA-
1, G3BP, RNAses [176]. As proteins which were found in droplets are associated with cellular
immune response, a second functional role of viral factories was proposed: Trap chambers for
cellular immune factors. These traps would act by hooking signal proteins thereby dampening the
cellular response as well as excluding cellular proteins such as RNAses, in order to protect viral
components. Viral factories were also shown to protect RNA from interaction with stress granule
proteins, which can adsorb viral RNA and suppress viral reproduction. Interestingly, Negri bodies
were shown to be able to fuse with SGs but do not mix [147]. Scaffold proteins of SGs were also
shown to be excluded from viral droplets for RSV [176]. Also, PI4KB binding is present on N for
HRSV and on P for HPIV3 [126]. Some cellular factors accumulated in viral droplets are known


                                                 21


Chapitre 1. Introduction

to accelerate replication and transcription: WDR5 [227] and Hsp72 [29] for measles, Hsp70 for
rabies [117] ; Hsp72 for RSV [145]. Moreover, co-expression of N and P increases Hsp72 expres-
sion level as was shown for mumps virus [109]. Cellular phosphatase PP1 was also shown to be
present in viral droplets. It participates in regulation of replication via phosphorylation of viral
transcription factor M2-1 [175].




                 Figure 1.17 – An illustration of possible roles of viral factories.


1.4.5   Microfilaments
    The cytoskeleton was shown to stabilise membraneless organelles and their distortion trigge-
red the formation of a single droplet which sedimented to the bottom of the cell [57]. A similar
effect was shown for rabies droplets: after cytoskeleton depolymerisation with nocodazole, single
droplets were observed in case of rabies, however in the case of non-treated cells droplets size was
in general smaller and they were distributed in the cell [117, 147]. The formation of droplets is
cytoskeleton independent, actin, microtubules and dynein are not required for viral factory forma-
tion however, it is required for budding and transport along a microtubule is thought to facilitate
distribution in the cell. Dynamics of microtubules apparently do not play role in budding as mi-
crotubules stabilisation with paclitaxel did not influence their formation and distribution [118].
In addition the ejection of ribonucleoprotein particles from the droplet following transport along
the microtubules was observed during live cell imaging. Again the integrity of the microtubule
network but not dynamics was required for the transfer [147].

1.4.6   Double membrane vesicles (DMVs)
    Viral replication factories of some viruses are shown to be surrounded by a double membrane
which originate from ER, Golgi apparatus or mitochondria. These are known as double membrane
vesicles. The relationship between the membrane and non-membrane viral factories is not clear,
however for certain negative sense RNA viruses it seems that membraneless organelles evolve
into viral factories surrounded with a membrane during the infection cycle. Such evolution was
demonstrated for rabies virus: Over time viral factories started to be associated with double mem-
brane and finally completely surrounded. In addition, viral particles were observed to bud from
these structures [118].


                                                 22


                                                        1.5. Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs)

    The existence of both membrane and non-membrane viral factories was also shown for RSV
and HPIV3, however the co-existence of both structures at the same time was not found.
    The benefit of the membrane in these cases (rabies, RSV, HPIV3) are not known, however, the
attraction of some membrane proteins was shown, for instance PI4P which is essential for viral
replication via regulation of L protein [126].


1.4.7   Multiple roles of viral factories
     To conclude, the formation of viral factories display a range of advantages for the virus. First,
it concentrates all of the molecular components involved in replication and transcription in a confi-
ned volume, thereby increasing the efficiency of the interaction processes. In addition, selective
permeability of the droplets could protect viral RNA and proteins from degradation and immune
system recognition. At the same time, essential cellular proteins, for instance, kinases can be se-
lectively attracted into droplets. Also, some signaling proteins seems to be present in droplets,
possibly they are silenced in viral factories in order to prevent activation of anti-viral cellular
response. The summary of putative viral factory functions is illustrated in Fig. 1.17.




1.5     Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs)
    Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are characterised by a lack of a constant 3D structure
and instead represent a conformation ensemble in the solution, but nevertheless remain functional.
The limits of the traditional paradigm "structure-means-function" were made even more evident
with the discovery of IDPs [220]. The primary sequence of IDPs is rich in polar and charged amino
acids, making their identification on the basis of sequence relatively unambiguous. Surprisingly,
more than 40% of human proteins are predicted to contain disordered regions longer than 30 amino
acids, pointing to the importance of such regions [150]. Indeed, many biochemical paradigms are
now known where IDPs play an essential role: Viral disordered proteins, signaling pathways, stress
response, transcription and translation [221].
    The difference between a folded protein and an IDP can be illustrated on the basis of their
energy landscapes. Folded protein energy can be minimised to the global minimum (or several)
which corresponds to the stable structured conformation. Disordered proteins exist as dynamic
polymers that rapidly interconvert between different conformations, and are better described by a
relatively flat energy landscape without deep minima. Due to their highly dynamic nature, IDPs
can be presented as an ensemble of conformers rather than a unique structure.


1.5.1   Functional classification of IDPs
    There are multiple ways to describe the diverse biochemical roles that IDPs have been ascri-
bed. As an example one can classify them into six classes by their function:
1. Entropic chains - disordered linkers which modulate distances between domains.
2. Display sites - disordered regions which contain sites for post-translational modification. As
they are exposed to the solution, they are easily accessible.
3. Chaperoning - controlling the structural folding of other proteins and nucleic acids, can be in-
volved in the conformations adaptation required for the complex formation.
4. Effectors - assist functions of other proteins. Via interaction with other IDPs can modify their
activity and can work in both directions: Promote and sequester the activity.
5. Assemblers - recruit binding partners, work as a scaffold for biochemical processes.
6. Scavengers - store and neutralise small ligands, or other proteins. [207].


                                                 23


Chapitre 1. Introduction




Figure 1.18 – Free energy landscapes of structured proteins characterized by a stable three-
dimensional structure are dominated by a single deep funnel. Disordered proteins are characteri-
zed by shallow energy landscapes with several local minima of comparable free energy, separated
by low barriers allowing fast interconversion kinetics between conformations [170].


    IDPs often combine several functions which are maintained by spatially distinct parts of the
protein. Another interesting feature of IDPs is that the same protein region can adopt different
conformations (depending on the binding partner or post-translational modification or the envi-
ronment) resulting in modulation of function [53]. In addition, interacting regions on an IDP can
overlap allowing it to rapidly switch between binding partners and create a dynamic network [71].

1.5.2   IDP structure characterisation
    IDPs can remain fully disordered or combine short structural elements, for example, transient
helices or even folded domains, the examples of such proteins are presented above (MeV N and P
proteins [82]). A complete folded protein and a fully disordered protein represent the extremities
while most of the proteins represent the continuum of conformational states in between them.




  Figure 1.19 – A continuum of protein structures from fully folded protein to disordered [203].

    Different degrees of disorder can be present along the IDP. Transient structural elements are
frequently present and act as molecular recognition elements which may undergo a disorder-to-
order transition upon binding to a partner one such example is measles N arms which fold into
helices during assembly [136]. Some regions display structural propensity even in a free form
which can increase upon interaction with the partner [102, 207].

1.5.3   Mechanisms of interaction
    Two distinct mechanisms of IDP binding are proposed: Conformational selection and induced
binding. The first, IDP is presented as an ensemble of conformations where one of the populations
has an ability to bind to a partner. Once it is bound it shifts the population towards the binding-
accessible. Following the second mechanism, a disordered region adopts a conformation while
interacting with a partner [53]. IDP interactions often show both aspects at the same time. A good
example of such combination is Sendai Ntail -XD interaction [189].


                                                24


                                                            1.5. Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs)

1.5.4   IDPs in viruses
    The size of the genome of human viruses is limited due to the limitations on the virion size. ss(-
)RNA virus genomes is in the range between 10 and 15 kilobase pair. As it was shown above, eight
proteins are encoded by measles, however, various function has to be maintained [82]. Using IDPs
the same protein can adopt different conformations and perform different functions during the viral
cycle. For example, Ptail of MeV is involved in N chaperoning, but also binds to cellular proteins
[136, 137]. Next, through molecular mimicry, viral IDPs could invade the host IDPs (or folded
proteins) position involved in various cell regulatory processes and hijack host cell machinery.
    In addition, IDPs exhibit a high mutation rate and thus fast evolution [22]. A single amino acid
mutation can cause major changes in a viral function as it can affect several proteins at the same
time if proteins are encoded with a frameshift. RNA virus mutation rates are 106 and 104 substitu-
tions per nucleotide site per cell infection which is much higher than for eukariotic genomes [50].
Such rapid evolution is utile for fast adaptation and gives an advantage to continue to spread.

1.5.5   Structural characterisation of IDPs
    The protein chain is composed of α-L amino acids covalently linked through amide bonds.
The backbone chain arrangement can be depicted by two dihedral angles φ and ψ which adopts
only certain combinations. The allowed angles areas are shown on a Ramachandran plot [169].
This constricts available conformational space [12].
    In case of IDPs, where the protein is expected to continuously interchange between very dif-
ferent conformations on a rapid timescale, the most appropriate description of backbone dihedral
angle sampling is to use a probability density function that maps the free energy landscape on a
residue specific level (see below).
    The overall compactness of the protein can be characterised by the radius of gyration (Rg)
which is the root mean square distance of the protein atoms from the centre of mass:

                                               r12 + r22 + ... + rn2
                                       R2g =
                                                         n
     For IDPs it is a probability distribution of Rg values rather than a single number. The probabi-
lity distribution of end-to-end distances is also a characteristic parameter for IDPs.
     Several models have been proposed to describe the behavior of IDPs, the simplest is probably
a "random-coil" model, which assumes that the chain is composed of the beads freely joined and
equivalent to a mathematical Gaussian chain model. In an ideal chain the end-to-end distance is
[180]:
                                                R2 = Nb2
and Rg is:
                                                   Nb2
                                               Rg =
                                                    6
    However, as was mentioned above, not all the values for the dihedral angles are allowed, so the
actual protein is not a random coil chain. Flory suggested a power law dependency of the polymer
size on a number of monomers:
                                             Rg = R0 N ν
, ν of an ideal chain is 0.5, for real polymers it depends on the properties of the polymer and
solvent, for swollen linear polymer the scaling factor was estimated to be 0.59 [59]. Using experi-
mental data ν was estimated to be (0.598±0.028) for denatured proteins [114] and 0.522±0.01 for
IDPs [12]. So, IDPs show more compactness in comparison with denatured proteins.
    In addition to the backbone dihedral angles restrictions, the nature of the side chains also
affects the conformational space of the protein. The structural characteristics and populations of


                                                    25


Chapitre 1. Introduction

the individual states in the conformational ensemble and the degree of compaction of the chain are
determined by amino acids content and their distribution in the IDP sequence.
    In general, IDPs are usually highly charged and rich with polar residues such as glutamine,
asparagine, serine, glycine, and proline. A diagram-of-states can represent predicted conforma-
tional properties of IDPs depending on their sequence compositions (Fig. 1.20). The three axes
denote the fraction of positively, negatively charged residues and hydropathy. The more hydro-
phobic residues are present the more globular and compact structure is predicted. Highly charged
(both negative and positive) chains are represented as swollen coil. IDPs which are enriched in
charged residues but have roughly equal numbers of positive and negative are called polyampho-
lytes. Although they are placed in the middle of the diagram and thus predicted to be folded, in
reality their dimensions depend on the distribution of the charges along the chain what can result
in long-range attractive or repulsive interaction. For instance, it was shown that the alternation of
charges along the sequence results in an extended chain while placing all positive charges on one
end and negative on the other end of the chain decreases the Rg [42, 207]. Although these rather
simplistic notions provide useful overall description of the physical nature of the disordered en-
semble, additional aspects, such a polar interactions, interaction with solvent, ionic composition
and temperature will all play important roles that will lead to a more complex behavior of a given
sequence in solution.




 Figure 1.20 – Diagram-of-states to classify predicted conformational properties of IDPs [207].



1.5.6   Ensemble representation of IDPs
    IDPs remain unstructured and highly dynamic in solution making it impossible to characterise
with a single conformation. Instead the structural description of IDPs is a map of probabilities
populating different regions of conformational space. A representative ensemble is the one which
defines the behaviour of the protein and correlates the conformational ensemble with the function
of the protein.
    Due to the very large number of degrees of freedom available to such a disordered system, the
problem of defining conformational space is highly underdetermined, requiring extensive experi-
mental data to delimit the structural propensities of a given protein. Flexible meccano approach


                                                 26


                                                      1.5. Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs)

uses the experimental information about the dihedral angle potential wells for each amino acid
type derives from high-resolution X-ray crystallographic structures. While generating a protein
ensemble, dihedral angles are randomly sampled using potential energy wells, each amino acid is
added one by one. In order to avoid steric clashes amino acid-specific hard-spheres are used. As a
result an ensemble of conformers is generated which represents a random coil [152].
    Using additional experimental data short- and long range conformational restrictions or struc-
tural elements can be identified, by modulation of local conformational propensities as a function
of experimental data, several such methods exist, for instance ASTEROIDS [13, 105].
    Last, but not least, the role of the dynamics of IDPs should not be underestimated. IDPs back-
bone motions determine their behaviour and probably control protein ability to phase separate.
The methods to study protein dynamics are presented in Chapter 2. Understanding how protein
dynamics changes during phase separation is one of the goals of the thesis and is discussed in
Chapter 5.




                                               27




                                                                        2
                                                                   Methods


In this chapter methods to study IDPs and their interactions are dis-
cussed with an accent on NMR spectroscopy. In addition, applica-
tions to study LLPS using biophysical methods and especially NMR
spectroscopy are introduced. Also, NMR methods to study protein dy-
namics are presented. I discuss recent advances in identifications of
minimal protein scaffold required for liquid droplet formation, cha-
racterisation of their properties and interactions between proteins.
Next, methods which were used during the experimental work pre-
sented in Chapter 3, 4 and 5 are presented.




                                 29


Chapitre 2. Methods

2.1    Structural and dynamic characterisation of IDPs
    Even though IDPs lack a unique structure they can be characterised by the overall compact-
ness, conformational stability, shape, transient long-range contacts, regions of restricted or enhan-
ced mobility, residual secondary structure. The most popular methods in structural biology, X-ray
crystallography and Cryo-EM cannot be used due to the impossibility of crystallisation and the
lack of electron density. However, solution state techniques can be applied for a long-range and
short-range conformational description.

Circular dichroism (CD)
    CD is the difference in the absorption of a right- and left-handed polorized light. This is a
popular method to study secondary structure of proteins as the α-helices, β -sheets and random
coil have a characteristic absorbtion spectra. Also the percentage of the protein structure or the
population can be determined from the intensity of the characteristic peaks. Following the intensity
of these peaks while changing the buffer or temperature, protein stability can be studied as well.
However, CD does not provide residue specific information about the protein. Global secondary
structure can be also studied by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of proteins (FTIR) and
Raman spectroscopy [34].

Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
     The physical basis of EPR is similar to NMR (see later in this chapter), however, instead of
nuclear spin, the electron spin is observed. This requires an unpaired electron for the detection,
most proteins can be studied only with spin labelling. Site-directed spin-labelling allows local en-
vironment, ac-cessibility and spin mobility to be measured. Using double labelling the distances
between labels can be determined. To conclude, using site directed spin labelling the information
about motions and interactions of particular residues is obtained, however, this requires mutagene-
sis, chemical modifications with labels, each residue requires a separate sample and measurement
[213].

Fluorescence anisotropy (FA)
    Fluorescence anisotropy allows the study of dynamics and interactions between proteins and
nucleic acids using fluorescence labels. The kinetics of slow processes can be followed as well,
for example, nucleocapsid assembly was studied by measuring FA of RNA-FAM which increased
during the process of encapsidation and NCs particles grow [136]. The principal of the method is
the following: The fluorophore is excited with a polarised light and only those molecules whose
excitation dipole moment is parallel to the polarised light will go to a higher energy state. After
a delay (fluorescence lifetime) the photon will be emitted also parallel to an emission dipole mo-
ment. Two fluorescence intensities are measured with a vertical (IV ) and horizontal (IH ) polorizer
placed before the detector to determine the anisotropy using the following equation:
                                                  IV − IH
                                            r=
                                                 IV + 2IH
The factor of 2 is indicating that the rotation in both clockwise and anticlockwise directions [119].
    Fluorescence anisotropy depends on the viscosity of the solution, size and shape of the protein,
which influences its rotational diffusion. The choise of a dye also plays a role first, because of the
length of the linker between the protein and fluorescent group: The longer it is, the smaller is the
anisotropy. In addition fluorescence lifetime affects anisotropy as it is the delay during which the
molecule is rotating. So, to compare the anisotropy of the protein between different conditions,
one must make sure that the fluorescence lifetime of the dye is not changing – a factor that can be
influenced by changes in the environment [100].


                                                 30


                                                2.1. Structural and dynamic characterisation of IDPs

Fluorescence lifetime and time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy
     Fluorescence lifetime is the average time of a fluorescence molecule life in an excited state. It
depends on the nature of a fluorophore, temperature and quenching.
     It is measured as a time-correlated single-photon counting which is based on the detection of
the arrival times of individual photons after excitation of a sample. The histogram of these times
is fitted with an exponential decay (single or a linear combination of several) to determine the
lifetime.
     Measuring fluorescence time-correlated single-photon counting with vertical (I(t)V ) and hori-
zontal (I(t)H ) polarisation allows to determine time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy:

                                                 I(t)V − I(t)H
                                       r(t) =
                                                I(t)V + 2I(t)H

From the anisotropy decay curve rotational correlation time (rc ) can be found:

                                           r(t) = Ae−t/rc

Again, if several rotations are present, the linear combination of exponents can be used to deter-
mine separate correlation times. The rotational correlation time characterises rotational dynamics
of the molecule, in the case of IDP it can be sensitive to a chain like dynamics or segmental
motions, as well as local dihedral angle fluctuations [41, 63, 100, 119]. Changes in the size of
molecule, its rigidity or the viscosity of the environment will affect correlation time. In compa-
rison with steady-state fluorescence anisotropy, changes in fluorescence lifetime do not influence
rc , allowing them to be compared between different samples even if the environment of the dye
changes.

Förster energy transfer (FRET)
    The efficency of energy transfer between chromophores depends on the distance between
them. Using double labelled proteins the distance between labelled sites can be determined. Mea-
suring a series of experiments with the labels placed at different positions allows the conforma-
tional dynamics of the molecule to be investigated, the extendness or the compactness of the
molecule, and the presence of long-range contacts [119].
    Single molecule FRET (smFRET) provides a direct observation of transient populations of
sub-states within molecular ensembles as single molecule methods avoid ensemble averaging,
thereby giving information about the complex distributions and dynamics of this important class
of proteins [122].

Small angle X-ray/neutron scattering (SAXS/SANS)
     In biological sciences, both techniques were initially applied to study folded proteins and
complexes, however can be optimised for IDPs as well. These are low resolution methods which
provides information about the size distribution and shape of the molecule. The scattered intensity
I(q) is the Fourier Transform of g(r), the correlation function of the electronic density r(r), which
corresponds to the probability to find a scatterer at position r in the sample if another scatterer
is located at position 0 : elastic x-ray scattering experiments reveal the spatial correlations in the
sample.
     In the case of IDPs, the SAXS curve represents the average over the conformational ensemble.
Unstructured proteins, due to the presence of extended conformations, are characterized by large
average sizes compared to globular proteins. The radius of gyration, Rg, which can be directly ob-
tained from a SAXS curve using a classical Guinier approximation, is the most common descriptor
to quantify the overall size of molecules in solution [81].


                                                  31


Chapitre 2. Methods

    As SAXS provides only averaged data, in order to extract molecular scale insights it is usually
used in combination with molecular simulations. A pool of random conformations of the protein
is used to generate individual scattering curves which are then used to fit experimental data and
select a representative ensemble, similar to the ASTEROIDS approach. Different algorithms for
generating initial pools can be used and different experimental data are used to apply the constrains
on the conformations space (SAXS, SANS, smFRET, NMR). Experimental data which provides
information about short- and long-range structural elements can be fitted [75].




2.2     IDPs by NMR
    All the methods mentioned above experience limitations : either they do not give a residue-
specific resolution or require labels that can only be used at a single site at the time. Nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) provides structural and dynamics information at atomic resolution
which measures the nucleus of the protein directly and not via an artificially added dye or spin
label. A range of different NMR methods have been developed during recent decades which allow
dynamic systems to be studied at different spatial and time scales.


2.2.1   Theoretical introduction to NMR
    Each nucleus is characterised by its nuclear spin, or nuclear magnetic moment (µ) which
produces magnetic interactions with an environment. The Zeeman interaction which is the basis
of EPR and NMR is the interaction between the static magnetic field B0 and the magnetic moment
of the nucleus or electron. This interaction can be represented as Zeeman Hamiltonian (Hz ) acting
on (µ) and producing eigenstates. The Schrödinger equation can be used to determine the nuclear
magnetic moment state :
                                                δψ
                                            ih̄    = Hχ
                                                δt
    The number of eigenstates depends on the nuclear spin number, for example for the proton it
is 1/2 with two eigenstates :
                                      χ = (cα (t)cβ (t))

and produced with energies Eα/β = ±1/2h̄γB0 , γ is the gyromagnetic ratio of the nucleus. Re-
sonance absorption of electromagnetic radiation which corresponds to the difference between ei-
genstates is called NMR. The frequency of the electromagnetic radiation which is absorbed by the
nucleus is called the Larmor frequency (ω0 ) which depends on the external magnetic field and the
gyromagnetic ratio of the nucleus :
                                           ω0 = −γB0

    This phenomenon of nuclear magnetic resonance was discovered by Rabi in 1938 and Purcell
and Bloch in 1946 [165] ; [74]. Each nucleus type has its own gyromagnetic ratio. In addition, the
local magnetic field of each nucleus is slightly different due to the electrons orbiting around the
nucleus what shield them from B0 . So the effective magnetic field is

                                          Bi = B0 (1 − σi )

and so the Larmor frequency for each nucleus is

                                        ωi = −γB0 (1 − σi )


                                                 32


                                                                                  2.2. IDPs by NMR

This allows to resolve not only different types of nucleus, for instance 1 H from 13 C, but also
the same nuclei experiencing different chemical environment, having different positions in the
molecule.
    Resonating frequency is measured in Hertz and usually displayed on a spectrum in units of
chemical shift, parts per million (ppm), as it is field dependant value calculated relative to a refe-
rence the Larmor frequency as:
                                              νsample − νre f
                                        δ=
                                                    νre f
    Even though the chemical environment of each nucleus is slightly different, working with pro-
teins it is impossible to distinguish all the protons due to resonance overlap. Multidimensional
NMR is usually used to study proteins using nitrogen or carbon Larmor frequency in the second
dimension. 14 N and 12 C spin quantum numbers are 1 and 0, however, their isotopes 15 N and 13 C
spin numbers are 1/2 what makes them suitable to study by NMR. Protein expression in isotope
labelled media is commonly used nowadays. Isotope labelling is not only useful for multidimen-
sional NMR but also allows selective labelling to additionally decrease crowding, label particular
amino acid types or groups, for example, methyl labelling, if necessary [31].

2.2.2   Comparison of IDP and folded proteins for NMR application
    Working with IDPs brings both complications and simplifications for using NMR. Because of
the disordered nature the average over all of the different chemical environments sampled by the
different amino acids in IDPs does not differ a lot, this makes the differences in amide 1 H chemical
shifts very subtle. Apart from the chemical shift difference between peaks, spectral resolution
also depends on the linewidth of the peaks. Fortunately, IDPs have much more narrow peaks in
comparison with folded proteins due to the fast rotational correlation time. The reason for this is
introduced below [115].

2.2.3   Spin relaxation
    When magnetic field is applied to the spin system the Hamiltonian contains only static com-
ponents such as Zeeman interaction, chemical shifts and scolar coupling interactions and the sys-
tem reaches an equilibrium state where longitudinal coherent component (Mz ) is non-zero and
transverse comonents (Mx y) are vanished. Each NMR experiment contains electromagnetic pulses
which can be presented as time-dependent radio frequency field Hamiltonians (Hr f (t)) which per-
turb the equilibrium so Mz change and Mxy becomes non-zero. After the end of the pulse the system
returns to equilibrium within a certain delay, the ensemble of mechanisms which brings the system
to this static state is called spin relaxation. There are several time-dependant Hamiltonians acting
during the relaxation delay: for reasons of clarity we will only discuss chemical shift anisotropy
(CSA) and dipole-dipole interactions (DIPS) :
                               H(t) = HRDM + HCSA + HDIPS + HJA
    Using NMR spectroscopy it is possible to observe how Mz and Mxy evolve. The characteristic
time constant during which Mz reaches the equilibrium value is called longitudinal, or spin-lattice
relaxation (R1 ). Measuring signal intensities in a series of experiments with different delay during
which the system is relaxing reveals the relaxation delay using:
                                    Mz (t) = Mz,eq 1 − e−tR1 Mz
                                                               

The transverse, or spin-spin relaxation time constant (R2 ) is the decay constant for the Mxy com-
ponent. Relaxation rate can be determined similarly to R1 , however during the evolution delay Mz
component evolution has to be eliminated what is usually done by a long rf pulse.
                                       Mxy (t) = Mxy (0)e−tR2


                                                 33


Chapitre 2. Methods

     Relaxation constants are dependent on the gyromagnetic ratio, magnetic field and rotational
correlation time, as well as the strength of the relaxation-active interaction (for example the dis-
tance between nuclear spins for the dipole-dipole interaction). Gyromagnetic ratio of the proton is
high, for this reason magnetisation can be transferred to the 15 N or 13 C which have lower gyroma-
gnetic ratio. The second influence relaxation as a square, for this reason increasing the magnetic
field does not always improve signal-to-noise ratio. The third affector is coming from the nature
of the relaxation mechanisms: microscopic fluctuations causing the relaxation-active interactions
which are proportional to e−t/τc , where τc is correlation time [31]. More explicit analysis of re-
laxation is going to be presented below in this chapter.
     Fast transverse relaxation of IDPs, due to the rapid correlation times, brings a huge advantage
to their study by NMR. Peaks line width is dependant on transverse relaxation as :

                                          ∆v1/2 = R2 /π

, where ∆v1/2 is the peak width at half height. So, as R2 of IDPs is shorter, the peaks are more
sharp what increases the resolution of the spectra [211]. For instance, a spectrum of 304 amino
acid long Ptail can be assigned despite the fact that the 1 H chemical shifts of the amide protons
only span < 1 ppm [137].




2.3    NMR methods for IDPs characterisation
    Proteins including IDPs are usually studies by 2D amide 1 H-15 N correlation NMR, several
types of experiments can be used to obtain 1 H-15 N spectra: Single quantum (SQ) correlation expe-
riments such as (HSQC and TROSY, or zero and double quantum correlation experiments (HZQC
and HDQC), multiple quantum correlation experiments HMQC. The only amino acid type which
is not present in the 1 H-15 N HSQC spectrum is proline because it does not contain an amino
group. The correspondence of particular amino acids of the protein to the peaks on the spectra can
be determined using 3D assignment experiments [32].

Assignment experiments

    For protein backbone sequential assignment is usually done via several 3D 1 H-15 N-13 C expe-
riments. They starts with 1 H-15 N and then magnetisation can be transferred on CO, Cα and Cβ of
the same residue or the previous one. Next, comparing chemical shifts between COi and COi−1 ,
          α , C β and C β the sequence of connected peaks can be determined. Each amino acid
Ciα and Ci−1    i        i−1
type has a range of possible chemical shifts for H, N, CO, Cα and Cβ . Some amino acid types have
very characteristic chemical shifts, for instance glycine, serine, thyrosine. So, the correspondence
of the peaks to an amino acid type can be done which helps to fit the determined sequence of peaks
to the protein sequence.
    IDPs can be rich in prolines which complicates the assignment as the sequence of connected
peaks is disturbed. In addition, regions with repeats of amino acids are very similar in chemical
shifts making it difficult to distinguish from each other [24, 115].

Structural propensities from chemical shifts

    The chemical shifts are sensitive to the local backbone geometry and as it was mentioned above
IDPs are much less disperse in the chemical shifts in comparison with folded proteins. Secondary
structure and further folding increases chemical environment difference, thus, induce chemical


                                                34


                                                         2.3. NMR methods for IDPs characterisation

shift variation. Secondary structure has a particular effect on the chemical shift, in particular of
13 C backbone shifts and so-called secondary chemical shifts :


                                    δ = δobserved − δRandomColi
provide information about the secondary structural elements propensities [195].
     The random coil value for each nucleus type and amino acid is different, reference values arise
from the experimental data. The reliability to distinguish secondary structural propensity from the
random coil is in the order 13Cα > 13CO > 1 H α > 13Cβ > 15 N > 1 HN to distinguish an α-helix
from a random coil ; and 1 H α > 13Cβ > 1 HN ~13Cα ~13CO ~15 N for β -strand. Algorithms which
combine chemical shifts from different nuclei can also be used for a better structure propensity
predictions [131].
     For IDPs the values usually fluctuate around zero and differ significantly only in the regions
of transient structures. Measuring secondary chemical shifts in free protein and in a complex with
a binding partner can reveal the regions which experience folding upon binding transition.

Residual dipolar couplings (RDCs)
   RDCs can provide an information about structure propensities and conformational behavior of
IDPs. It is based on a through space dipolar coupling between two spins as:
                                                h̄γI γS
                                  DIS (θ ) =          3
                                                        [1 − 3 cos2 θ ]
                                               4π 2 rIS
, where γI and γS are gyromagnetic ratios, rIS is the inter-spin distance, Ω is the angle between
the inter-spin vector and the magnetic field B0 . In the isotropic solution due to fast tumbling and
the average over all orientations in the ensemble, the net dipolar coupling is averaged to zero.
Dissolution in an aligned medium results in a small percentage of the molecules adopting a prefe-
rential alignment breaking the isotropic averaging resulting in an observable dipolar coupling that
depends on the population distribution of internuclear vectors with respect to the magnetic field.
    For IDPs usually several RDCs are measured: DH−N , DHα−Cα , DHα−C0 , DN−C0 , DH−C0 , and
DH−H . For this HSQC type experiments are measured on a sample with aligned media and non-
aligned. Then, peak splittings are measured, in a non-aligned medium only scalar couplings (J)
between the nuclei of interest are observed. In the aligned media both J-coupling and dipolar cou-
pling contribute. Comparing two sets of experiments dipolar coupling can be extracted. RDCs
provide powerful structural constraints for NMR structure determination of folded proteins, while
in IDPs, it is necessary to take into account the averaging of the alignment properties of an entire
ensemble of conformers, which provides important insight into the local and long-range confor-
mational behaviour of the IDP in solution [20, 104].

Paramagnetic Relaxation Enhancement (PRE)
     PRE can be used to study long-range contacts (up to 25 Å) and solvent accessibility in IDPs.
R2 relaxation increase has a sixth power inverse dependency on the distance between the unpaired
electron in the paramagnetic probe and the observed nucleus due to dipolar relaxation. For the
first application paramagnetic spin labels at defined positions on the protein is used. Chemical
modification is usually is usually introduced by mutating a cysteine into the sequence, and HSQC
type experiments are recorded to extract peak intensities and additionally transverse relaxation is
measures to directly detect the enhancement. As a reference sample with reduced PRE label (so
non-active) is used – as the chemical modification can affect chemicals shifts and possibly cause
additional shifts or broadening [144]. To study solvent accessibility paramagnetic probes are in-
troduced directly into solution. Series of HSQC spectra with various percentages of paramagnetic
probes in the solution are recorded to follow the intensity of the protein. The less broadening
would be observed in the regions of less solvent accessibility [88].


                                                   35


Chapitre 2. Methods

Diffusion NMR

    Translational diffusion of the molecule can be also studied by NMR. For this pulsed field
gradient (PFG) spin-echo NMR techniques can be used. To measure the diffusion 1D or 2D ex-
periments can be used, with two z-gradients applied to the sample. During the delay between the
gradients molecules diffuse and magnetisation of those which position changed is not recovered,
so signal intensity drops. In order to calculate diffusion coefficient several experiments with va-
rying gradient strength are recorded. Then using following equation:

                                     I(g) = I(0)e−D(γgδ ) (∆−γ/3)
                                                         2




, where I(g) is the peak intensity at particular gradient strength, I(0) - is the reference intensity
at minimal gradient strength which is used to take into account losses in the intensity due to the
relaxation. ∆ is the diffusion delay, δ is the gradient time, g is the gradient strength and γ is a
gyromagnetic ratio and D is a diffusion coefficient [25].
    Diffusion coefficient is dependent on the temperature, viscosity and most importantly on the
hydrodynamic (Stokes) radius. This can give an information about protein oligomeric state, bin-
ding, assembly can be followed, and for IDPs the extension or the compactness of the chain can
be examined [51].


ASTEROIDS

     Experiments described above give different type of information about IDP structure and dy-
namics. At the same time all the experimentally measured values are the average over the comfor-
mational ensemble of the protein under study. Molecular simulation provides a molecular charac-
terisation of protein populations and combine all experimentally obtained protein characteristics.
     One such approach is called ASTEROIDS (A Selection Tool for Ensemble Representations
Of Intrinsically Disordered States). It is an algorithm which selects from a pool of a random coil
conformations of the protein a representative ensemble which fit and complement experimental
data.
     An example of combining chemical shift information with RDCs and PRE data is shown in
[183]. SAXS data were additionally included to NMR parameters [191].


Relaxation
    15 N NMR relaxation (15 N-T        and 15 N–1 H NOEs) is a common method to characterise local
                                  1 ,T2
conformational dynamics. CSA and DD are generally considered to be the same along the protein
chain, so the variations in 15 N relaxation are associated with the difference in the local motions
of the backbone. It is sensitive to a fast (ps–ns) time scale and different modes of motions can be
extracted. For IDPs the dynamics has recently been interpreted in terms of three modes : Fast ( 50
ps) local librations, intermediate ( ns) conformational sampling of backbone dihedral angles, and
slow ( 10 ns) chain-like motions. Different 15 N relaxation rates are sensitive to the different modes
of motions [115, 184].
    NMR captures biomolecular motions at atomic resolution and supports understanding of the
biomolecular dynamics-function paradigm. 15 N spin relaxation experiments map amide bond mo-
tions thought their dependency on a spectral density function (introduced below). So, the problem
of NH bond dynamic characterisation reduces to the determination of a spectral density function.
Relaxation rates are combinations of spectral density function values at several frequencies and
cannot determine what these values are, it required a use of a theoretical model. The most com-
monly used one is called "model-free approach" proposed by Lipari and Szabo [128] is described
further.


                                                 36


                                                       2.3. NMR methods for IDPs characterisation

    In the next sections correlation function and spectral density function are described, then re-
laxation experiments commonly used for protein dynamics study are discussed together with their
dependency on spectral density function. And finally the theory of model-free analysis is expained.

2.3.1   The correlation between relaxation rates and protein dynamics
   Correlation function describes random fluctuations in the system by measuring the difference
between the states after different delays:

                                     C(t, τ) = hF(t)F ∗ (t + τ)i

where t is an initial time point, τ is the delay after which system state is compared and F is an
operator defining an parameter which is compared. In other words, correlation function defines
how fast the system loses its memory about the initial state and tends to 0. Fourier transform of
the correlation function represents the speed of the evolution of the system at different frequencies
and is called spectral density function:
                                            Z ∞
                                   J(ω) =         C(τ)cos(ωτ)dτ
                                             0

    In case of spin dynamics F operator represents fluctuations of the magnetic field which spin
is experiencing, fluctuations are caused by rotational diffusion of the spin. Thus, using spectral
density function rotational diffusion of the molecule can be determined.
    As it was mentioned above relaxation rates are functions of spectral density as several frequen-
cies and thus, store molecular dynamics information. In case of NHN spin system five frequencies
can be mapped on a density function: J(0), J(ωN ), J(ωH ), J(ωN − ωH ) and J(ωN + ωH ), on Fig.
2.1 samplings of J(ω) by these frequencies and their contributions to different relaxation rates are
shown.




Figure 2.1 – Schematic representation of the samplings of J(ω) by three relaxation parameters.
Adapted from [Peng:1991]

    Contributions of spectral density function values at these five frequencies to longitudinal re-
laxation (R1 ), transverse relaxation (R2 ) and cross-relaxation (σNH ) rates are the following:

                          d2
                   R1 =      [J(ωH − ωN ) + 3J(ωN ) + 6J(ωH + ωN )] + c2 j(ωN )
                          4

                                                  37


Chapitre 2. Methods

             d2                                                         c2
      R2 =      [4J(0) + J(ωH − ωN ) + 3J(ωN ) + 6J(ωH ) + 6J(ωH +N )] + [4J(0) + 3J(ωN )]
             8                                                          6
                                    γH 2
                         σNH = 1 +     d (12J(ωH + ωN ) − 2J(ωH − ωN )
                                    γN NH
                                                       √
                                 3 ) and c = ∆σ ω / 3. γ and γ are gyromagnetic ratios of H
   where d 2 = (µ0 hγH γN /8π 2 rNH                 N       H      N
and N, h is a Planck’s constant, rNH is the length of the bond, ∆σNH is CSA of the spin, µ0 is the
permeability of free space. Cross-relaxation process is measured as a steady- state heteronuclear
NOE:
                                                     γH σNH
                                        NOE = 1 +
                                                     γN R 1

    In total five parameters has to be determined from three equations what requires a theoreti-
cal model of motion. Lapari and Szabo model-free formalism relies two considerations: Modes
of motions are independent and the motions are characterized by only two physical parameters:
S2 a generalized order parameter and τi an effective correlation time. Initially, two modes were
proposed to be essential for the characterisation of protein dynamics: local and global. However,
for IDP dynamic description three modes are required [72]:

                               2    S2 τs       (S2f − S2 )τi (1 − S2f )τ f
                         J(ω) = (             +              +              )
                               5 1 + ω 2 bτs2    1 + ω 2 τi2   1 + ω 2 τ 2f

where S2 is the square of the generalized order parameter for the slow motion, S2f for the fast
motion and Si2 = S2 /S2f for the intermediate motion. τs , τi and τ f are rotational correlation times for
the slow, intermediate and fast motions correspondingly. These motions corresponds to the local
librations, backbone dihedral angle fluctuations, and chain-like segmental motions. To conclude,
such analysis, allows to determine the influence of viscosity, temperature or other parameters on
the dynamics of different motional modes.




2.4     Coupling of IDP dynamics to solvent
    Recently a model which allows to predict IDP relaxation rates under various crowded condi-
tions was proposed. It requires measurement of 15 N relaxation rates for the description of backbone
motion. Then using microviscosity measurements chain dynamics can be extrapolated to the new
environment using following equation:

                                       τk (C) = τk,∞ (εk ρ(C) + 1)

where τ is the correlation time at given concentration (C), or ∞ - infinite dilution ans ε is a friction
coefficient which should be determined for each motional mode. Microviscosity is proposed to be
measured using water longitudinal relaxation:

                                                    RC1 − R01 )
                                           ρ(C) =
                                                        R01

Such model was successfully applied to predict relaxation rates in cell and potentially can be used
to predict protein behaviour in droplets [4]. Water content and viscosity change dramatically in a
biocondensate, and protein backbone dynamics are probably affec-ted as well.


                                                   38


                                                                   2.5. Protein interaction by NMR

2.4.1   Water relaxation as a proxy for effective viscosity of the protein
     Solvent environment predetermines protein rotational and translational diffusion and several
studies links protein hydrodynamics to water dynamics and shows correlation between water and
protein rotational correlation [85]. Moreover, microviscosity influence the timescales of different
motional modes of protein. So, water dynamics can be used as a proxy for local viscosity. Using
NMR water rotational diffusion can me measured by 1 H longitudinal relaxation.
     Water is involved in hydrogen bonding with protein molecules and can interact with a NH
group of the backbone and with aromatic and charged residues via their side chains. The residence
time of the water molecule at hydration site is in a range off 10-50 ps at room temperature [85]. In
supercrowded media hydrogen exchange with a NH peptide group was shown to remain the same
, however side chains should be examined as well. So, water relaxation in droplet can be used as a
tool to follow local viscosity.
     An alternative to water relaxation measurements to determine effective viscosity in biological
aqueous samples via 1 H can be measurement of 17 O which does not have a contribution of the
Rex . However, 17 O natural abundance is 0.037% and also dissolved molecular oxygen has to be
eliminated from the sample by degassing before measurements. [173].
     Recently, 23 Na was proposed as a reference molecule to measure internal fluidity by measuring
its rotational transnational diffusion. Both parameters longitudinal relaxation rates and transnatio-
nal diffusion coefficient are more more sensitive to subtle viscosity change for 23 Na then for 17 O.
What is interesting, in this study 1D 23 Na spectrum of a condense phase showed double peak what
suggests the existence of two microenvironment and the chemical exchange between them was
confirmed [65]




2.5     Protein interaction by NMR
    Using NMR to study protein interactions brings a lot of advantages in comparison with other
methods. First, NMR is extremely sensitive allowing observation of ultra weak binding with a
Kd of 10 s of millimole . Second, residual information about the involvement in the binding can
be obtained with NMR as in a spectrum each peak can be treated independantly. NMR therefore
allows distinct interactions to be followed using the same set of experiments [137]. All this gives
enough information about the interface of binding and helps to build a model of a complex. Apart
from the structural information about binding the affinity and on and off rates of binding can be
determined using NMR [189]. It provides a range of different techniques sensitive to different
affinity ranges and different time scales.


2.5.1   Chemical exchange
    Protein interaction can be interpreted as a chemical exchange when the spin nucleus in the
binding region experiences differences in the chemical environment. This exchange is observed
even in the system which reached an equilibrium state. Two main characteristics of the exchange
are constant of dissociation (Kd ) and the exchange rate ke x depend on the reaction rates k1 and
k−1 :
                                                  k1
                                              A         B
                                                  k−1

Then
                                                        k1
                                             Kd =
                                                       k−1


                                                  39


Chapitre 2. Methods

                                            kex = k1 + k−1
The first characterise the affinity of binding, the second is indicating the kinetics of the interaction
[61].
    It should be mentioned that as the spin experiences different chemical environments in dif-
ferent states, there is also the difference in chemical shift, thus in the Larmor frequency (∆ω) and
ppm. The effect on NMR spectra is dependant on the difference between kex and ∆ω and different
methods exist to study this exchange by NMR (Fig. 2.3 ). Chemical exchange affects resonance
positions, intensities, and linewidths in NMR spectra [11].




Figure 2.2 – (a) Rex transverse relaxation rate. (b) Resonance offset for two-site chemical exchange
constants [153].

    Apart from the chemical shift dependency on the rate of the chemical exchange, the contri-
bution of Rex to the measurement of transverse relaxation is also affected. On the Fig. 2.2 the
dependancy of Rex and ∆ω on the ratio kex /∆ω are shown. One can notice that the Rex curve is at
its maximum when kex = ∆ω and so the maximum broadening is observed. From the dependency
of Rex and ∆ω several regimes can be extracted: Fast, intermediate and slow exchange [153]. How
NMR spectra are affected by them and which methods can be applied to study the interaction is
described below.

Slow exchange
    kex « ∆ω
    The exchange is slow enough to reveal two peaks as initial frequencies ωA and ωB (Fig. 2.3).
The intensity ratio between the peaks is dependant on the affinity and the concentration of binding
partner, thus on the populations [61]. The intensity of the peaks can be interpreted as an estimate
of the bound-fraction only as long as the transverse relaxation of the bound state is known to be the
same as the free state, or can be accurately estimated, which is rarely the case. Alternatively, in the
case of millisecond to sub-second timescale exchange, the so-called zz-exchange approaches can
be used, which allow exchange of magnetisation to be measured as a cross-peak in a 2D-NOESY
type experiment.


                                                  40


                                                                  2.5. Protein interaction by NMR




Figure 2.3 – Chemical exchange regimes ranked by the comparison between kex and ∆ω cause
different types of resonance in exchange between two states (A and B). NMR methods for charac-
terizing the minor states in exchange with a visible species at different timescales with a rough
range of timescales over which they can be applied. In the slow exchange regime, two separate
peaks correspond to states A and B, although in practice state B may be invisible due to a low si-
gnal/noise ratio. In the fast exchange regime, a single peak is observed with a population-averaged
chemical shift and apparent R2 . In the intermediate exchange regime, the peaks undergo extreme
chemical shift broadening, and the apparent R2 is greatly enhanced due to Rex . The three methods
shown toward the right (PRE, lifetime line broadening (Rllb), and DEST) are used to visualize a
minor state with a greatly enhanced R2 compared with the major state. The other methods shown,
toward the left, depend on either a difference in chemical shift between states A and B (rotating
frame relaxation dispersion (R1ρ ), CPMG relaxation dispersion, and CEST) or a difference in
rates of hydrogen exchange [11].




    If one of the populations is low or has a much slower tumbling in comparison with the other
state, the peak can be absent. Saturation transfer experiments can be used to study the so called
"dark" state. In the case of slow exchange and an exchange with a large size complex, dark state
exchange saturation transfer (DEST) experiment can be used, the timescale range is 500 µs - 1
s. When the linewidth of the states differs enough, it is possible to saturate the resonances of
an invisible state and the exchange rate is faster than the longitudinal relaxation rate (R1 ), the
magnetisation is transferred to the visible state and observed as a loss of the intensity [55].


                                                41


Chapitre 2. Methods

Slow-intermediate exchange
   kex < ∆ω
   Broadening affects the peaks and also the peaks are present at the intermediate frequencies
between ωA and ωB . The broadening arises from the increase in the transverse relaxation:

                                           R2 = R02 + Rex

The "invisible" state in this case can be studied using chemical exchange saturation transfer
(CEST) experiment. Continuous-wave (CW) RF field at the invisible state resonance will cause
a loss in intensity of the corresponding resonance in the NMR-visible major species, it is similar
to DEST although unlike DEST, it requires significant chemical shift difference between the two
states [206]. Next, the data can be fit to the McConnell equations, providing kinetic parameters (k1
, k−1 ) and populations pA and pB [135].

Intermediate exchange
     kex ' ∆ω
     The most broadening is observed at this regime that can lead to an apparent disappearance of
the observed signal. As Rex is significant at this regime and can be used to extract information about
binding, one of such methods is Carr–Purcell–Meiboom–Gill (CPMG) relaxation dispersion. Du-
ring this experiment the apparent transverse relaxation is measured which has a contribution on
R02 and Rex . The contribution of Rex depends on a frequency of an applied spin-echo pulses and
B0 field. The data recorded at several fields (usually two are used) and by sampling the apparent
relaxation at different spin-echo pulses frequencies (0 to 1000 Hz is a common range) the data
can be fitted to the the McConnell equations, and similar to CEST, kinetic parameters and popu-
lations are estimated [86]. The faster the exchange the higher the effective frequency (CPMG or
spin-lock) is required to sample the exchange events.

Fast-intermediate exchange
   Fast exchange kex > ∆ω
   The transverse relaxation is decreasing, which narrows the peak, however the intensity is still
broadened and only one peak is observed.

Fast exchange
   kex » ∆ω
   Only one averaged signal is observed. The frequency at which the peak appears is closer to the
Larmor frequency of the dominating population: ωAB = pA ωA + pB ωB Kd can be determined from
measurement of the peak positions on a HSQC spectra. The observed chemical shift (δobs ) is the
weighted average of the shifts in the free and bound states in this regime:

                                        δobs = δ f fF + δb fB

where F goes for "free" and B for "bound". After certain mathematical transformations the depen-
dency of δobs on component concentration and the Kd can be obtained:

                          ∆δmax ([A] + [B] + Kd ) − (([A] + [B] + Kd )2 − 4[A][B])1/2
                ∆δobs =
                                                     2[A]

where Deltaδobs is the change in the observed shift from the free state, and ∆δmax is the maximum
shift change on saturation. The saturation curve where the concentration of one of the components
([B]) is varied is fitted with the equation and Kd is determined [217].


                                                 42


                                               2.6. Biophysical methods to study phase separation

   In case if the interaction is weak and the saturation cannot be reached, Kd can be extracted
from the transverse relaxation measurements. In the fast exchange regime the Rex contribution is
negligiable so the measured value of R2 is a combination of transverse relaxation at both states:
                                       AB               AB
                               R2 =          RAB
                                              2 + (1 −       )RA
                                      AB + A           AB + A 2

where RAB                                              A
        2 is a transverse relaxation of a complex and R2 of a free A component. This equation
can be rewritten in the form containing Kd :
                                        B + AB
                               R2 =              (RA B − RA2 ) + RA2
                                      Kd + A + AB 2
Measuring R2 values at several B concentrations allows to fit the curve and estimate the Kd . It
should be mentioned that this approximation works only for the fast regime, where Rex is negligible
and the interaction is weak so the fitted curve is linear [138].




2.6     Biophysical methods to study phase separation
    During recent years multiple protocols to study phase separating systems and the methodo-
logy for their characterisation were proposed. A range of methods for qualitative and quantitative
analysis of phase separation can be applied. Below an overview of several of the most popular
methods is presented.

2.6.1   Turbidity
     Phase separation in the solution can be detected even by eye at certain concentration, as the
solution is becoming milky because of light scattering by colloids. In order to estimate it quanti-
tatively, the absorption at 400 nm, 500 nm or 600 nm can be registered. The higher the value, the
higher the turbidity and so the phase separation is more pronounced. Usually the value of 0.1 is
taken as a threshold of phase separation [17, 155].
     This method is quick and does not require specific instrumentation, small volumes are requi-
red especially if a nanodrop is used, so a detailed screen of conditions can be easily obtained to
plot a phase diagram. However, light scattering can be caused by many factors apart from phase
separation: aggregation, precipitation, amyloid formation, so, additional methods are necessary to
confirm phase separation.

2.6.2   Microscopy Light and Fluorescent
    Using microscopy, the presence of colloids in solution can be imaged to confirm phase se-
paration and not aggregation (in case of phase separation, spherical particles are observed). Size
distribution, number of droplets and the morphology of droplets can be calculated [171], also mi-
croscopy is more sensitive than turbidity test and allows to verify the phase diagram (Fig. 2.4).

     If the droplets are highly hydrophobic, they can wet the surface of the glass slip and can cover
all the surface which makes the observation of the phase separation more complicated. Pegylated
glass or addition of BSA in the solution can be used to avoid droplet wetting of the surface [7, 70,
97, 182]. A small volume and low concentration requirement are the advantages of the method.
     Several parameters of the droplets can be followed using light micropscopy: Size distribution
of droplets and number per cell [14], following fusion events to determine viscosity/surface tension


                                                 43


Chapitre 2. Methods




Figure 2.4 – Light and fluorescent microscopy provides information about droplets number, size
and morphology (top panel). The phase diagram indicates regions of environmental conditions
with single and double phase. Phase diagram can be done as a function of various parameters
(lower panel) [68].


and viscoelasticity [58]. Using confocal microscopy droplet surface tension can be determined
from the contact angle or using right angle imaging (Fig. 2.5) [58] [97]. All these proves the liquid




Figure 2.5 – Droplets surface tension determination. Right angle imaging technique measures
the height and the radius of droplet from which surface tension can be obtained. Surface wet-
ting technique provides surface tension value from the contact angle of the droplet. This requires
information about the hydrophobicity of the surface [68].

nature of the droplets and additionally provides individual characteristics.
     Fluorescent microscopy allows selective labelling of components of the solution and following
its distribution in between phases. Several components can be followed simultaneously using mul-
tilabels that can reveal co-localisation or inhomogeneous distribution (Fig. 2.6) [58, 185].
     In addition, protein concentration can be determined using fluorescence intensity in vitro or in


                                                 44


                                               2.6. Biophysical methods to study phase separation




Figure 2.6 – Fluorescence microscopy provides a source to determine molecular distribution in
droplets. Protein co-localisation or demixing can be determined, also several phase co-existence
can be imaged [68].


vivo and even be tracked during the cell life cycle [113, 121, 209].


2.6.3   Phase diagram analysis
    Using protein concentrations in co-existing values a full phase diagram can be estimated with a
Flory-Huggins model. It is a mean-field model which is traditionally used to describe the behaviour
of phase separation systems with two components. It is based on Helmholtz free energy change
upon polymer and solvent mixing and introduce a mean parameter of polymer-solvent interaction
χ which defines the difference in interacting energies between polymer and solvent uAB , polymer-
polymer uAA and solvent-solvent uBB as :



                                          z(2uAB − uBB − uAA )
                                     χ=                                                       (2.1)
                                                 2kT

Then the energy of mixing is:



                                      ∆Umix = χφ (1 − φ )kT                                   (2.2)

And the Helmholtz free energy of mixing:



                                               φ        1−φ
             ∆Fmix = ∆Umix − T ∆Smix = kT (       lnφ +     ln(1 − φ ) + χφ (1 − φ )          (2.3)
                                               NA        NB

The entropic contribution to the energy, which is small for polymers, is promoting mixing, the last
one can be positive or negative depending of the sign of χ. Thus, the energy of mixing can have
an attractive or repulsive effect depending on the χ parameter, and the degree of polymerisation
of molecules. Obviously, the energy of mixing also depends on temperature and volume fractions
of the components. Determination of the χ parameter is important to understand the properties
of the solution. It depends on the temperature, chain length and composition of the polymer in a
non-trivial way, empirically, it is depends linearly on temperature:



                                                        B
                                          χ(T ) = A +                                         (2.4)
                                                        T

                                                45


Chapitre 2. Methods

, where A is an entropic and B is an enthalpic part.
    In order to determine this interacting parameter a temperature–composition phase diagram has
to be constructed. The boundaries of the phase diagram can be determined by measuring polymer
composition in co-existing phases at different temperatures (φ | and φ || ). Fmix dependency on the
composition is asymmetric in case if NB 6= NA , so the common tangent line is non-horizontal
and ( δ ∆       )φ =φ | = ( δ ∆
       2   Fmix              2   Fmix
         δφ2                   δφ2
                                      )φ =φ || correspond to two equilibrium phases. By equating the second
derivative of free energy to zero:


                             δ 2 ∆Fmix         1        1
                                       = kT (     +            − 2χ) = 0                             (2.5)
                                δφ2           NA φ NB (1 − φ )
This curve corresponds to the boundary between unstable and metastable regions (spinodal). And
if χ can be extracted:


                                           1 1         1
                                         χ= (    +                                                   (2.6)
                                           2 NA φ NB (1 − φ )
, so


                                                       B
                                Ts =                                                                 (2.7)
                                       0.5(1/NA φ ) + 1/(NB (1 − φ ))) − A
       , which can be fitted to phase diagram to determine A, B and χ.
       The critical point corresponds to ( δ ∆
                                            3   Fmix
                                              δφ3
                                                     ) = 0. For a polymer-solvent solution, NB = 0 the
critical composition is φC =    √1 ,   critical interacting parameter χC = 12 + √1N and the critical tem-
                                  N
                   B
perature TC =    χC −A .


2.6.4      FRAP
     Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching is a common method to prove the liquid nature of
droplets and protein exchange between phases. FRAP is summarised in Fig. 2.7. Briefly, the area
is illuminated with a high power laser, bleaching fluorescent labels in this region. The recovery of
fluorescent intensity is associated with a diffusion of the labeled molecules. Application of FRAP
to a phase separated sample requires fluorescent label and the use of the confocal microscope.
Protein exchange between phases can be followed by bleaching an entire droplet, the diffusion
inside droplet can be followed by bleaching a small area inside the droplet. Using multiple labeles
FRAP can be applied simultaneously to several components of the droplet.
     In order to analyse quantitatively FRAP the profile has to be fitted with a model. In the simplest
case if protein exchange between phases is only dependant on the molecular diffusion two models
are usually used, first with a simple exponent:
                                             I(t) = A(1 − et/τ )
, where I(t) is the intensity, t is time, A is the mobile fraction which is rarely equal to 1 and τ is
the recovery rate. Also the combination of exponents can be applied for the fit. The other one is
the infinite boundary model which has the following dependency in the 2D case [201]:
                                  I(t) = e−τ/2t I0 (−τ/2t) + I1 (−τ/2t)
The recovery curve fits to the infinite boundary model in case of diffusion limitation. In case of
reaction limited recovery for interactions between components, are required kon and ko f f have to
be taken into account [196]. In the simplest case it has the following dependency:
                                            I(t) = A(1 − e−ko f f t )


                                                      46


                                               2.6. Biophysical methods to study phase separation




Figure 2.7 – Illustration of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching principle (top panel). Pro-
tein exchange between phases can be studied by bleaching an entire droplet, protein diffusion
inside droplet can be measured by bleaching a small region inside droplet (middle panel). Fluo-
rescence recovery profile representing fast (solid line) and slow diffusion cases (long dashed line),
the case with a small mobile fraction is illustrated with short dashed line [68].


2.6.5   Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
    AFM imaging can be also applied to phase separating systems. The advantage of this method is
that it allows to work at nanomolar concentrations, however, if higher concentrations are required,
the background signal will be too high. An example of AFM application to study FUS protein
phase separation around DNA damage sites was published recently, allowed determination of DNA
and protein molecules and even the DNA damage sites [193].

2.6.6   Electron microscopy
    Another destructive method which can be used is Cryo electron microscopy what allows ima-
ging of droplets less then 100 nm in diameter [125]. Next, Cryo-electron tomography allows de-
termination of ultrastructural organization inside droplets, which was done on a tripartite droplets
with two proteins and lipid vesicles [218].

2.6.7   Fluorescence techniques
    Steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy theory were introduced above in ap-
plication to study IDPs. In the condensed phase, anisotropy is expected to increase as the mobility
is dampened due to the increase in viscosity, however, it is also dependent on protein conforma-
tion and the mobility of the region where the dye is attached to. Time-resolved anisotropy decay
usually has a biexponentional dependency: The fast one corresponds to the rotation of the dye,
the slow component is associated with protein. In case of IDP, it depends on backbone segmental


                                                 47


Chapitre 2. Methods

torsional mobility what depends on the compactness of the chain [129].
    The affinity between proteins and nucleic acids in droplets can be determined using smFRET.
Measuring time-dependent distance changes between the dyes reveals the dynamics of the inter-
action, which can be compared with the dilute state [54].
    Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) measurements can be used to infer molecular dif-
fusion coefficients, droplet nanorheology via probe-size-dependent permeability. For this, several
radius particles and their hydrodynamic radius can be used to calculate an apparent viscosity (Fig.
2.8) [212]. However, microrheology can be also studied using confocal microscope by tracking




  Figure 2.8 – Schematic illustration of the droplets probe-size-dependent permeability [212].


bead diffusion in the droplet [54].
    Next, using FCS protein concentration in a dilute and condense phases allows to determine
a full coexistence curve (binodals) in a phase diagram [132]. Finally, with fluorescence cross-
correlation spectroscopy (FCCS) complex formation and interactions between the components in
droplets can be studied [92].
    Using fluorescent labelled proteins, the solvent accessibility can be studied by quenching of
fluorescein with potassium iodide (KI) measuring fluorescence lifetimes as a function of KI and
concentration [129].




2.6.8   SAXS, SANS and DLS

    Comparing SAXS [67] and SANS [140] measurements carried out in a dilute and condense
phase allows to reveal long-range corformational changes in the protein which occur during the
transition between phases. From Rg the degree of chain extension can be determined. Similarly,
the hydrodynamic diameter measured by DLS can be used [67].




2.7     NMR spectroscopy to study phase separation

     Both, solution- and solid-state NMR can be applied to study LLPS, however, here only solution-
state is going to be discussed. The theoretical introduction to NMR and methods for IDP charac-
terisation were presented in section 2. In this section practical aspects to study phase separating
systems are reviewed.


                                                48


                                                2.7. NMR spectroscopy to study phase separation

2.7.1   Sample preparation for NMR measurements
Dispersed phase
    Using just the dilute phase for the measurements already provides useful information for phase
separation characterisation. Individual proteins and interaction between them can be studied. There
are many examples of phase separating proteins for which chemical shifts do not change much bet-
ween phases, so the initial assignment can be done in a disperse phase and adapted for the condense
phase spectra [21, 181]. Next, NMR measurements can be performed on an over-saturated sample
which passed the region of phase separation, however, conformational transitions and interactions
are hypothesised to happen under such conditions [214].

Colloid sample
    In such samples two phases coexist. As the condense phase has a higher density, it sediments
overtime to the bottom, which restricts the measurements to a short time period. In general, the
signals coming from the dilute phase molecules are much more intense due to the faster tumbling,
which masks the signal from the condensed phase [204]. However, successful examples where
the signals from both phases are present on HSQC spectra exist. It should be mentioned, that
chemical shifts of the protein in two phases were different and the signal from the condense phase
was significantly weaker. The signal coming from the dilute phase can be removed by applying
a pulse field gradient diffusion filter. The basics of this method were described above in section
2.1.4 to study protein diffusion. This removes the signal from molecules which diffuses faster than
10-7 cm2 s-1 [172].

Single droplet sample
    Filling the NMR tube sensitive volume with only condensed phase requires a lot of sample, as
the protein concentration is estimated to be around 400 mg/ml. 3 mm diameter tubes require 130
µl, using Shigemi 3 mm allows to decrease volume, 1 mm diameter tubes enables the use of 20 µl
samples. As the phase is highly viscous additional complications arise with sample transfer into
the NMR capillary, but different protocols exist [21, 26, 146, 181].

2.7.2   Conformational changes induced by LLPS
    In the condensed phase broadening in 1 H dimension causes peaks overlap and complicates
determination of separate peaks. First, D2 O can be placed in a separate capillary tube to avoid
contributions of solvent exchange [9]. Also additional improvment can be achieved using apodisa-
tion function for line sharpening [26]. In some cases, pH can be decreased or 13 C-direct detected
experiments can be applied to avoid line broadening [111].
    Protein conformation in the condensed phase is interesting in the context of transitions which
occur during phase separation, the driving forces and the physics of the process. So, a compa-
rison between protein conformation and dynamics in dilute and condensed phase is particularly
important.
    To begin, secondary structure changes can be examined by comparing secondary chemical
shifts which can be compared if protein spectra in both phases are assigned [38].
    Long-range conformational changes and contact within a single molecule can be examined
by intramolecular PRE, which is sensitive to the transient weak contacts up to 25 Å[141] ; [181].
In combination with ASTEROIDS approach, the information about protein conformations space
changes during the transition between phases can be investigated.
    Finally, protein dynamics also indicates structural changes in the protein by highlighting the
regions which are becoming more rigid. Backbone dynamics in a pico-to-nanosecond timescales
can be examined by R1 , R2 , and heteronuclear 1 H-15 N NOE. In general, due to increased viscosity


                                                49


Chapitre 2. Methods

and protein concentrations spin relaxation increase all along the protein chain [21, 172, 181]. Ad-
ditional contributions can be associated with an increase in a structural propensity in some regions
[146]. And of course conformational exchange (Rex ) can contribute to R2 (presented below in sec-
tion 2.2.3). Chain dynamics in condensed phase can be further analysed to reveal the influence of
a crowded environment which is discussed later in this chapter.


2.7.3   Protein interactions and transient contacts in condence phase
     One of the driving forces which mediates LLPS is interaction between chains. NMR provides
multiple techniques which can be applied to study interactions at different strengths and exchange
regimes which were successfully applied to study phase separation.
     Intermolecular PRE provides information about dynamic interactions, however, the interpre-
tation can be challenging due to the variability in partitioning of the PRE labeled protein and the
extent of labeling [141, 181].
     NOESY can reveal residues involved in contacts mediating phase separation. Contacts up to
6 Å can be determined on NOESY spectra. To differentiate between intra- and intermolecular
contacts, differential isotopic labeling schemes can be combined with heteronuclear filtering (13 C,
15 N). For example, using 13 C edited 1 H-1 H NOESY alanine, valine, glycine and proline type re-

sidues were shown to be involved in contacts during phase separation on elastin-like polypeptides
[172]. For Ddx4 phenylalanine and arginine were shown to be most prone to form contacts [21].
     Increased R2 spin relaxation can indicate an chemical exchange associated with particular
residue or linear region. For instance, again multiple regions of enhanced relaxation centered at
aromatic residues were found for hnRNPA1 which are important for phase separation [132].




2.8     Sample preparation and experimental details
2.8.1   Protein expression and purification
    MeV P and N constructs were cloned between the Nde I and Xho I into pET41c(+) finishing
with a C-terminal 8His-tag [137]. All proteins (if different is not stated) were expressed in Esche-
richia coli Rosetta TM(lDE3)/pRARE (Novagen) with incubation overnight at 20◦ after the induc-
tion with with 1 mM isopropyl-β -D-thiogalactopyranoside at an optical density of IOD = 0.6.
N1-525 was co-transformed with P1–507 and purified in complex. Measles N401-525 (Ntail ) gene
(strain Edmonston B) was cloned into the expression vector pET22b with a N-terminal 8His-tag
and transformed into Escherichia coli BL21 (Novagen) for expression. After cells were centrifuged
at 5000 rpm for 20 min, the pellets were resuspended in the lysis buffer (20 mM Tris (pH 8.0),150
mM NaCl or 500 mM NaCl for XD containing constructs), sonicated and centrifuged again at
18000 rpm, 50 min. The supernatant was subjected to a Ni-purification. The protein was eluted
with 20 mM Tris (pH 8), 150/500 mM NaCl, and 500 mM imidazole. TEV cleavage was perfor-
med overnight at 4◦ C in the presence of 2 mM DTT. The sample was concentrated and subjected
to size exclusion chromatography (SEC, Superdex 75/200) in NMR buffer (50 mM Na-phosphate
(pH 6.0), 150/500 mM NaCl, and 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)). The protocols of P50 N525 , P50 N405 ,
P300 N525 , and P300 N405 purification are described in more details in (13, 14). Mutation of S491L in
N and of 409 VLK411 ->AAA in P were inserted by site-directed mutagenesis, and P50 N525 (S491L),
N460–525 (S491L), P304–507 (409 VLK411 →AAA), and P377–507 (409 VLK411 →AAA) were produced
and purified in the same way as wild-type proteins.
    Expression of unlabeled protein was performed in LB medium. Proteins labeled for NMR (15 N
and 13 C) were expressed under the same conditions in M9 minimal medium.


                                                 50


                                                 2.8. Sample preparation and experimental details

2.8.2   Fluorescent and PRE labelling of protein samples
    Cysteine mutations for fluorescence labeling were performed by site-directed mutagenesis into
the constructs where previously all native cysteines were exchanged to alanines. Mutant proteins
were expressed and purified in the same way as wild type and concentrated to around 100 µM.
The proteins were then labeled using maleimide chemistry [124]. Briefly, the protein was incuba-
ted overnight with 10 mM DTT, then dialyzed against 50 mM Na-phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and
150/500 mM NaCl in two steps, and mixed with 5 times excess of maleimide dye (fluorescein,
Alexa Fluor 594 or TEMPO for PRE) solubilized in dimethyl sulfoxide. After 2 hours of incuba-
tion at room temperature, the labeling reaction was stopped by adding 5 mM DTT, and proteins
were separated from the excess dye by SEC (Superdex 75/200) in NMR buffer. Only second step
was used in case of TEMPO labelling.

2.8.3   Protein phosphorylation
    P304 , P304 N405 and P304 N525 were phosphorylated with CK2 kinase (Merck, Germany) in the
presence of 100 ATP and 10 mM MgCl2 . Sample was incubated at least 24 hours before purifica-
tion on SEC column (S75 or S200), if different is not stated.

2.8.4   RNA samples
   RNA samples were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies (Leuven, Belgium), they
were terminated either with OH at both 30 and 50 or with fluorescein amidite at the 30 end.

2.8.5   Protein phase separation and turbidity measurements
    First P and N constructs were mixed and then diluted with a buffer, so that the final NaCl
concentration was 150 mM (unless different is stated). Before the turbidity measurements samples
were incubated at room temperature for 5 min, and the absorbance at 395 nm was collected three
times on a NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). An
absorbance of 0.1 was used as a turbidity threshold indicating the presence of phase separation in
the sample.

Concentration measurement
    Ntail concentration determination in condense solution at different NaCl concentration and
temperature was performed as following: Protein was mixed with PEG solution with various NaCl
concentrations, so that final Ntail was 300 µM, PEG 200 mg/ml what triggered phase separation,
sedimented the droplet down over night in PCR machine at given temperature. Next, volumes of
both phases were measured and then protein concentration in the presence of guanidinium chloride
was determined by the absorbance at 280 nm. Condense phase was diluted 40 times before the
measurement, dilute phase twice. The protocol described in [21] was used, density of 1 was used
to calculate void volume portion of protein.

2.8.6   Phase diagram fitting with the Flory-Haggins model
    Based on protein concentration measurements of a dilute and condense phases, phase diagrams
of coexistence curves (temperature vs. concentration) were plotted for several salt concentrations
(118 mM, 181 mM, 244 mM, 307 mM and 377 mM NaCl). Measured concentrations were trans-
ferred into volume fraction using density of 1. Next, phase diagram was fitted with:

                                                   B
                            Ts =                                                             (2.8)
                                   0.5(1/NA φ ) + 1/(NB (1 − φ ))) − A


                                                51


Chapitre 2. Methods

 , which A and B are fitted parameters, NA = 1 representing solvent, NB = 130 representing Ntail , φ
is the volume fraction. Curve for each salt concentration was fitted independently, χ is determined
for each temperature using:
                                                      B
                                             χ = A+
                                                      T

2.8.7    Light and fluorescence microscopy imaging
     Differential interference contrast (DIC) or epifluorescence was used for light imaging on an
Olympus IX81 inverted microscope. Fluorescence signal was acquired using a 485(20)-nm (for
fluorescein) or a 560(25)-nm (for Alexa Fluor 594) excitation filter combined with a 525(30)-
nm or a 607(36)-nm emission filter, respectively. Excitation light (Metal-Halide X-Cite 120) and
emission wavelengths are split using a 4X4M-B quadriband dichroic mirror (Semrock). Oil im-
mersion objectives 60x (Olympus PlanAPON60, 1.42 numerical aperture (NA)) or 100x (Olympus
UPLFLN, 1.3 NA) were used for imaging, and a Hamamatsu Orca Flash4.0-V2 sCMOS (scien-
tific Complementary Metal-Oxyde Semiconductor) 2048 x 2048 detection camera was used. The
acquisition and further data analysis and processing were performed with Volocity (Quorum Tech-
nologies) software.

2.8.8    Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP)
    FRAP experiments were measured on an Olympus IX81 spinning-disk confocal microscope
equipped with a Yokogawa CSUX1 spinning disk head, diode-pumped solid-state lasers 488 nm
(50 mW Coherent Sapphire) and 561 nm (100 mW Cobolt JIVE4). Emission light is filtered
through a 520(28) nm filter for fluorescein. Acquisition is performed with an iXon Ultra EMCCD
(Electron Multiplying Charge-Coupled Device) (Andor) 512 x 512 pixel detection camera. Blea-
ching was restricted to a region of interest, defined graphically, with a galvanometric FRAP/PA
device (Andor) using the same lasers used for imaging with AOTF (Acousto-Optic Tunable Filter)
15% and with a dwell time of 50 ms. 10 images are taken before bleaching and 40 repeats after
with a 2 s interval. The laser power and the dwell time during bleaching were optimized to bleach
50% of the initial fluorescence intensity. FRAP profiles were extracted and analyzed using FIJI and
python plugin ImageFRAP (https://imagej.net/Analyze_FRAP_movies_with_a_Jython_script).

2.8.9    Steady-state fluorescence anisotropy
    NC assembly was followed by fluorescence anisotropy as described in [136] using various
concentration of protein (tested constructs of N are described in Chapter 4) and 0.5 µM 10-base
RNA-FAM (polyA or polyU) which was added prior to the kinetic acquisition. RNA fluorescence
kinetics were recorded using excitation light at 470 nm and emission was recorded at the wave-
length of 520 nm. Parallel and perpendicular polarization directions were recorded alternatively
and used pairwise to calculate the fluorescence anisotropy.

2.8.10    Time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy
     Time resolved fluorescence anisotropy decays were measured using a Mini-Tau fluorescence
lifetime spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, UK) equipped with a 450 nm picosecond pulsed
diode laser and a TCC2 electronics module for time-correlated single photon counting. Photons
detection was used with high-speed photon multiplier tube (Hamamatsu H10720-01). The sample
was excited with vertically polarized light, parallel and perpendicular polarized fluorescence light
was detected during 120 s sequentially. Photon arrival times histograms were calculated from
each measurement, and anisotropy decays were calculated as described above in this section. The
G factor was measured for each buffer condition using the free dye.


                                                52


                                                 2.8. Sample preparation and experimental details

2.8.11    Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)
    Isothermal titration calorimetry for protein was measured with iMicroCal iTC200 at 298 K.
The titration experiment was performed by sequential addition of 2µl aliquots of 500 µM PXD
into the microcalorimeter cell filled with 50 µM Ntail . In total 20 injections of XD with 180 sec
intervals in between were done through titration ; the reaction mixture in the microcalorimeter cell
was continuously stirred at 750 rpm. The experimental titration curve was fitted to the 1:1 binding
model using the Origin version 7.0 software from MicroCal.

2.8.12    Negative-stain electron microscopy
    For NC structures, imaging with negative-stain electron microscopy 50 µM RNA (HO-A6-
OH) was added to 20 µM of protein (P50 N525 , P304 N525 , P50 N405 , P304 N405 phosphorylated or
non-phosphorylated) or to droplets formed by mixing 20 µM P50 N525 and 80 µM P304–507 in a final
volume of 20 µl. After the incubation for 1 hour at 37◦ C, 2 µl of the sample were applied to the
clean side of carbon on mica (carbon/mica interface), and stained with 2% sodium silicotungstate
(pH 7.0). Images were taken with a T12 FEI microscope at 120 kV and 30,000 magnification.

NMR spectroscopy used in Chapters 3 and 4
2.8.13    Assignment
    All experiments were acquired in NMR buffer (150 or 500 mM NaCl) at 25◦ C. The spectral
assignment of P50 N525 at pH 6.0 was adapted from the previously published assignment at pH 7.0
(13) using 13 C, 15 N-labeled samples using a set of BEST-TROSY triple resonance experiments.
    The spectral assignments of 13 C- and 15 N-labeled P377–457 and P457–507 constructs were ob-
tained using sets of BEST-TROSY triple resonance experiments correlating Cα , Cβ , and CO re-
sonances at 600 MHz. Phosphorylated residues of P304 were assigned using triple resonance ex-
periments. Spectra were processed with NMRPipe [45], and automatic assignment with further
manual verification was performed with the program MARS [107]. Secondary chemical shifts
(scs) for Cα , Cβ , CO, N and HN were calculated using the random coil values from refDB [225].

2.8.14    Ensemble analysis of Ploop
    The genetic algorithm ASTEROIDS selected representative ensembles using experimental 1 H,
15 N, and 13 C(C , C and CO) backbone chemical shifts. A initial 10000-member ensemble of P
                α   β                                                                         loop
conformations was generated using the statistical coil model flexible-meccano [152], next, 200-
conformer ensembles matching experimental backbone chemical shifts were selected using the
ASTEROIDS genetic algorithm as previously described [148] ; [105]. In total, four iterations were
used to generate the final representative ensemble.

2.8.15    Determination of apparent Kd values from NMR experiments for the inter-
          action between N and Ploop /PXD
   15 N R1 relaxation rates were obtained by sampling the decay of magnetization with seven de-
lays between 0 and 1.71 s. R1ρ relaxation rates were measured using seven delay times between
0.001 and 0.24 s. The spin-lock field was 1500 Hz, and R was calculated from R1 and R1ρ , as
described above. The residue-specific apparent Kd values for P377–457 were obtained for each re-
sidue from 15 N relaxation as described in section 2.2. P377–507 concentration remained constant
(100 µM), and N concentration was sampled from 0 to 140 µM. The rotational correlation time
of the complex was assumed to be equal to τc of P50 N525 alone and was estimated from its mo-
lecular weight. 15 N relaxation dispersion experiments was measured for 15 N labelled P457–507 of
100 µM in the presence of 70 and 30 µM unlabeled Ntail at 700 and 850 MHz using 14 points


                                                53


Chapitre 2. Methods

at CPMG frequencies between 31 and 1000 Hz with a constant-time relaxation delay of 32 ms
[86]. CPMG profiles for nine residues and two fields were fitted simultaneously using ChemEx
(https://github.com/gbouvignies/chemex) and a two-state exchange model. The bound population
of P457–507 to N460–525 (pB ) and the exchange rate (kex ) were calculated from the fit, and the Kd
was calculated assuming a 1:1 stoichiometry. The error for the Kd calculation was estimated by
the error propagation from the fitting error of pB and assuming 5% error in the concentration
determination of both proteins.
    Relaxation experiments (R1ρ , R2 , 1 H-15 N, hetNOE) of P304 and P304 N525 phosphorylated and
non-phosphorylated were measured using 100 µM concentration.


2.8.16   NMR measurements of phase-separating samples
    15 N-labeled
              P50 N525 and P304–507 were mixed at several ratios and then loaded in a 3-mm
           1 15
NMR tube. H- N HSQCs and R1ρ experiments were measured as described above. Pulsed field
gradient NMR diffusion experiments were measured using 15 N-edited stimulated-echo diffusion
experiments using a 300-ms diffusion delay with 16 or 20 z-gradient strengths ranging linearly
from 0 to 0.55 T m1 [210]. 1 H-15 N HSQCs were measured using both P50 N525 and P304–507 15 N-
labeled samples at a constant P304–507 concentration of 75 µM with P50 N525 5, 10, 20, 50, and
100%. The concentration of P50 N525 and P304–507 in the dilute and condensed phase was estimated
on the basis of intensities of 23 for P50 N525 and 9 for P304–507 non-overlapping and non-interacting
residues. Their intensities were summed and normalized by the intensities in the spectra of the
individual proteins. The amount of each protein in condensed phase was then estimated by sub-
traction. That allows to estimate the concentration of droplet-associated N and P in the sensitive
NMR volume. The ratio between N and P in the condense phase was estimated as a function of
total the concentration of N in the sample.


2.8.17   Kinetic measurements by NMR
    Kinetics of P50 N525 (with and without P304–507 or P377–507 ) nucleocapsid assembly were follo-
wed using NMR spectroscopy using the procedure introduced previously [136]. Time resolution
was approximately 8 min (time of HSQC spectra measurement). The assembly process was trig-
gered by adding six-nucleotide RNA (OH-A6 -OH), and the kinetics were followed by measuring
intensities of resonances from P1–50 on SOFAST HMQC spectra. Assembly rates were calculated
by averaging intensities of 18 peaks and fitting the profile with a biexponential function. Mean
assembly rates were calculated as follows: k1*a1 + k2*a2, where k1 and k2 are time rates, a1 and
a2 are the amplitudes.
    Phosphorylation kinetics were measured on P304 of 100 µM concentration by measuring SO-
FAST HMQC spectra after addition of 8 ng/µl CK2, 10 mM MgCl2 and 100 µM ATP. The inten-
sity decay of non-phosphorylated peaks and the increase on newly appeared peaks were followed
and fitted together for each residue separately in order to determine phosphorylation rates.
    Kinetics of P304 N405 phosphorylation followed by assembly was measured in the presence of
8 ng/µl CK2, 10 mM MgCl2 , 100 µM ATP and 2mM six-base polyA RNA. Phosphorylation and
assembly rates were followed as described above.


NMR spectroscopy used in Chapter 5
2.8.18   Supercondense NMR sample preparation
   Mixture of 15 N-13 C Ntail with non-labelled were used for sample preparation (from 100% to
1% labelled). Protein sample of around 2 mM concentration was mixed 1:1 with PEG solution of
400 mg/ml in NMR buffer and centrifuged at 1000 rpm, 25◦ for at least 3 hours. Condense phase


                                                 54


                                                  2.8. Sample preparation and experimental details

formed on the bottom of the eppendorf was transferred to a 3 mm Sigemi tube using a glass pipet
and hand centrifuge.

NMR measurements
    All experiments were acquired in NMR buffer at 25◦ , if different is not stated, on Bruker
cryoprobe spectrometers at 1 H frequencies of 600, 700, 850, or 950 MHz using TopSpin software.
All spectra were processed and analysed with NMRPipe [45] and NMRFAM-sparky [123], 1D
spectra of water longitudinal relaxation were analysed using Python library nmrglue [91].

2.8.19    Assignment
    Backbone assignment of Ntail in super-condense phase was verified using a 15 N-13 C label-
led sample. For this, a set of BEST triple resonance experiments were acquired (HNCO, HN-
CACO, HNCA and HNCOCA). The comparison of secondary chemical shifts between dilute and
condense phase protein were done using random coil values from refDB [225].

2.8.20    15 N   relaxation measurement
    Four 15 N relaxation experiments were aquired: R1ρ , R1 , 1 H-15 N heteronuclear NOE and trans-
verse cross-correlated relaxation [157]. R1ρ and R1 were measured with ten delays, the exact range
was optimised depending on the viscosity of the sample. R2 was calculated using R1ρ and R1 mea-
surements, a spin lock 1500 Hz, resonance offset was calculated for each residue using its 15 N
chemical shift.

Pulsed field gradient (PFG)
   PFG NMR diffusion experiments were measured using 15 N-edited stimulated-echo diffusion
experiments using a 300-ms diffusion delay with 16 or 20 z-gradient strengths ranging linearly
from 0 to 0.55 T m1 [210].

2.8.21    Water relaxation measurement
    Microviscosity was measured using R1 of water with 20 delays. Water signal was integrated
and the extracted intensity dependency on the delay was fitted with a single exponent using Python
3.

2.8.22    Model-free analysis
   15 N relaxation rates extracted for each residue of Ntail , data for two fields (850 and 600 MHz)
and three peg concentrations (0, 37.5 and 75 mg/ml) were fitted together using model-free analysis:

                           d2
                    R1 =      [J(ωH − ωN ) + 3J(ωN ) + 6J(ωH + ωN )] + c2 j(ωN )
                           4
            d2                                                         c2
     R2 =      [4J(0) + J(ωH − ωN ) + 3J(ωN ) + 6J(ωH ) + 6J(ωH +N )] + [4J(0) + 3J(ωN )]
            8                                                          6
                                                   γH σNH
                                       NOE = 1 +
                                                   γN R 1
                                    γH 2
                         σNH = 1 + dNH    (12J(ωH + ωN ) − 2J(ωH − ωN )
                                    γN
                            1           µ0 hγH γN
                   ηxy =      P2 (cosΘ(      3
                                                  )(σ|| − σ ⊥)ωN (4J(0) + 3J(ωN ))
                           15            4πrNH


                                                 55


Chapitre 2. Methods
                                                  √
                              3 ) and c = ∆σ ω / 3. γ and γ are the gyromagnetic ratios of
where d 2 = (µ0 hγH γN /8π 2 rNH               N        H       N
H and N, h is a Planck’s constant, rNH is the length of the bond, ∆σNH is CSA of the spin, µ0
is the permeability of free space. An expression introduced in [4] for rotational correlation time
dependency on the viscosity was implicated:

                                      τk (C) = τk,∞ (εk ρ(C) + 1)

where τk,∞ is the correlation time at infinite dilution, ρ is the viscosity at given peg concentration
(C), ε is a friction coefficient. In total seven parameters were fitted with an in-house script for each
residue: S2 , S2f , τi , τs , ε f , εi and ε f . τ f was fixed to 0.045 ns.
    Droplet sample was fitted independently using data at to fields (600 and 850 MHz) with four
parameters: S2 , S2f , τi , τs . τ f was fixed to 0.1 ns.

2.8.23    PRE
    PRE effects were measured using 1 H-15 N HSQC of 300 µM 15 N-Ntail labelled with TEMPO
either alone or in supercondense phase made with non-labelled Ntail , so that 1% of the sample was
labelled in order to eliminate inter-residual interactions. Reference diamagnetic sample that was
incubated with 3 mM of ascorbic acid before acquisition. For the super-condense sample a buffer
containing ascorbic acid was added on top, the total concentration for the entire volume was 3
mM and incubated over night. Peak intensities were extracted from the HSQCs using NMRFAM-
sparky [123] and their ratios between paramagnetic and diamagnetic samples were calculated.

2.8.24    Generation of Ntail boxes at different concentrations
    Ensembles of Ntail conformations were generated using a flexible meccano [152] modified
script which generates backbone chains by randomly sampling amino acid-specific backbone di-
hedral angle potential wells and using a self-avoiding walk. Four boxes were generated: infinite
dilution (separate Ntail chains), 15 mM, 27.5 mM and 40 mM. Boxes of 50x50x50 nm dimentions
were generated, the starting points of Ntail chains generation with flexible meccano were placed
on a lattice in a box (shifts in xyz by 4.42, 3.81 and 3.19 nm for 15 mM, 27.5 mM and 40 mM
cases). Next, side chains are added to the complete chain with pulchra [178] and missing protons
with reduce [219]. Coordinates of atoms are added to the "avoid list" which is used during the
generation of the following chains in order to avoid clashes. Rg and end-to-end distances are cal-
culated for each chain. Dihedral angles of the generated chains are calculated using torsion library
from Bioplib [163] and visualised with Python.




                                                  56




Measles Virus Nucleo- and Phosphoproteins form
 Liquid-like Phase-Separated Compartments that
                                                                               3
               Promote Nucleocapsid Assembly


     In this chapter measles viral factories formed by nucleo- and phos-
     phoproteins are discussed. It starts with the article where biophysi-
     cal characteristics of viral factories reproduced in vitro were studied
     (section 3.2). A minimum scaffold system was found by screening a
     panel of different mutants. A disordered region of P called Ploop was
     characterised using NMR and a new interaction with N was found
     and its role in phase separation is proposed in section 3.4. Next,
     an interaction between N and P essential for phase separation was
     discovered. Using NMR spectroscopy protein distribution between
     two phases was measured as a function of N:P total ratio. Based on
     these experimental data a thermodynamic model of N and P phase
     separation is proposed in section 3.3. Next, the influence of phase
     separation on nucleotide assembly was shown using a combination
     of fluorescence microscopy, NMR spectroscopy and negative stain
     electron microscopy. Supplementary materials for the article can be
     found in Annexe 1. In addition, preliminary results on the involve-
     ment of cellular client proteins in viral factories are shown (section
     3.5). And MeV droplets formed by full length of N and P are discus-
     sed in section 3.6.




                                       58


                                                                                   3.1. Introduction

3.1    Introduction
    Viral replication machinery has been shown to form bio-condensates in host cell cytoplasm
(for example in Rabies virus), all essential components required for replication co- localise: N,
P, L, nucleic acids. During the course of the work I carried out in vitro during this thesis, similar
observations were made in vivo for measles virus. Phase separation of viral proteins have never
been studied in vitro previously. MeV N and P both contains long disordered regions and several
interactions between them are known. In addition, P has a tetrameric structure that further increases
the multivalency between proteins. All these suggests N and P as possible scaffolds for MeV phase
separation. In section 3.2 an article which characterises viral factories is presented.
    Further analysis of droplets is still essential. Models capable of describing the behaviour of
droplets can help to understand the mechanism of viral phase separation and reveal interactions
crucial for its formation and regulation.
    Small molecule drugs are shown to partition into biocondensates that has broad implications
for drug discovery. Many anticancer drugs were shown to concentrate in membraneless organelles
[112]. This discovery makes it impossible to ignore phase separation in drug design from now on.
On the opposite, we should learn how to profit from this. The field of antiviral drug design could
be revolutionized if viral factory disassembly could be used as a target.




3.2    Article
    Supporting information to the article is presented in Annex 1.




                                                 59


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

VIROLOGY                                                                                                                                 Copyright © 2020
                                                                                                                                         The Authors, some
Measles virus nucleo- and phosphoproteins form                                                                                           rights reserved;
                                                                                                                                         exclusive licensee
liquid-like phase-separated compartments that                                                                                            American Association
                                                                                                                                         for the Advancement
promote nucleocapsid assembly                                                                                                            of Science. No claim to
                                                                                                                                         original U.S. Government
                                                                                                                                         Works. Distributed
Serafima Guseva*, Sigrid Milles*, Malene Ringkjøbing Jensen, Nicola Salvi, Jean-Philippe Kleman,                                         under a Creative
Damien Maurin, Rob W. H. Ruigrok†, Martin Blackledge†                                                                                    Commons Attribution
                                                                                                                                         NonCommercial
Many viruses are known to form cellular compartments, also called viral factories. Paramyxoviruses, including                            License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
measles virus, colocalize their proteomic and genomic material in puncta in infected cells. We demonstrate that
purified nucleoproteins (N) and phosphoproteins (P) of measles virus form liquid-like membraneless organelles
upon mixing in vitro. We identify weak interactions involving intrinsically disordered domains of N and P that are
implicated in this process, one of which is essential for phase separation. Fluorescence allows us to follow the
modulation of the dynamics of N and P upon droplet formation, while NMR is used to investigate the thermo-
dynamics of this process. RNA colocalizes to droplets, where it triggers assembly of N protomers into nucleocapsid-­
like particles that encapsidate the RNA. The rate of encapsidation within droplets is enhanced compared to the




                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
dilute phase, revealing one of the roles of liquid-liquid phase separation in measles virus replication.



INTRODUCTION                                                                        with L (12). The process of nucleocapsid assembly on viral RNA
Measles virus (MeV) is a highly contagious virus that is responsible                sequences was recently studied in real time, using nuclear magnetic
for more than 100,000 deaths every year. No treatment currently exists              resonance (NMR) and fluorescence (13), highlighting the role of NARM
for MeV infection, and the impact of MeV throughout the world                       and P1–50, and leading to high-resolution structures revealing N-RNA
has recently been amplified by weakening levels of vaccine coverage (1).            interactions in assembled nucleocapsids (14).
MeV is a nonsegmented, single-stranded negative-sense RNA virus                         In recent years, liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS), driven by
(Mononegavirales) of the family Paramyxoviridae, whose members                      weak interactions often involving intrinsically disordered proteins
carry their own replication machinery comprising nucleoprotein                      or RNA, has been shown to offer a highly efficient means to spatially
(N), polymerase (L), and phosphoprotein (P) components. N binds                     and temporally control a remarkable array of cellular processes (15).
to the viral genome, assembling into helical nucleocapsids, while P                 The physicochemical properties of these microenvironments are
chaperones N before encapsidation and is thought to bring N and L                   thought to provide optimal conditions to enhance specific molecular
in close spatial proximity during replication and transcription (2, 3).             interactions within the condensate, while maintaining immiscibility
The replication process represents a promising but hitherto relatively              with respect to other excluded molecules (16–18). A number of viruses
unexplored therapeutic target.                                                      have been shown to form cytoplasmic compartments in infected cells,
    N and P both comprise domains exhibiting high levels of intrinsic               known as “viral factories,” that have been associated with the viral
disorder, with respectively 30 and 75% of their primary sequences                   replication process (19, 20). Colocalization of N and P in vivo is a
lacking tertiary structure. N has a 125–amino acid disordered C-terminal            characteristic feature of mononegaviruses such as rabies (21), vesicular
domain (NTAIL) (4) and a flexible 30–amino acid N-terminal arm                      stomatitis virus (22), respiratory syncytial virus (23), human para-
(NARM), flanking the RNA binding domain NCORE, while P comprises                    influenza types 3 (24) and 5 (25), human metapneumovirus (26), Nipah
disordered domains of 304 amino acids (PTAIL) (5) and 80 amino                      (27), and MeV (28, 29). Inclusion bodies from MeV have been shown
acids (PLOOP), on either side of a coiled-coil tetrameric domain (6),               to colocalize host proteins such as WDR5 (WD repeat-containing
and is capped by a C-terminal three-helix bundle (XD) (Fig. 1A) (7).                protein 5) (28) and other viral proteins [the polymerase L as well as
N and P exhibit numerous interactions that are essential during dif-                C that is involved in controlling host immune response (30)]. Recent
ferent stages of the viral cycle: Two distant linear motifs in PTAIL,               confirmation of the liquid-like nature of Negri bodies formed in rabies
P1–50 and P186–198, participate in chaperoning the monomeric form                   (31) and colocalization of N and P in infection-induced cytoplasmic
of N (5, 8), preventing binding to cellular RNA. In an N0P heterodimer,             inclusion bodies in MeV (32) suggests that LLPS represents a wide-
P1–50 binds to the same surface of N as NARM of the succeeding                      spread mechanism exploited by mononegaviruses during infection.
protomer in assembled nucleocapsids (9), so that the N0P complex                        Here, we demonstrate that mixing MeV N and P proteins in vitro
efficiently inhibits assembly. XD is known to bind to NTAIL (10, 11),               triggers LLPS, allowing us to characterize the physical nature of the
an interaction thought to be important for colocalizing N and L                     droplets, including the modulation of the dynamic behavior of N
during the replication process and was recently shown to interact                   and P upon droplet formation, the molecular basis of the stabilizing
                                                                                    interactions, and the thermodynamics of droplet formation. We are
                                                                                    able to show that RNA molecules preferentially localize to the droplets
Institut de Biologie Structurale, Université Grenoble Alpes-CEA-CNRS, 71, Avenue    and, once within the droplets, trigger assembly of nucleocapsid-like
des Martyrs, Grenoble, France.                                                      particles. The process of nucleocapsid assembly in LLPS is observed
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: martin.blackledge@ibs.fr (M.B.); rob.ruigrok@ibs.fr   in real time using NMR spectroscopy. The rate of assembly is sig-
(R.W.H.R.)                                                                          nificantly enhanced compared to non–phase-separating conditions,

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                              1 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE




                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
Fig. 1. Macroscale physical characterization of MeV droplets in vitro. (A) Schematic diagram of the structure of N and P; intrinsically disordered regions are presented
as lines and folded domains are presented as boxes. (B) Fluorescence or DIC images of mixtures where phase separation events were observed: P50N525 (80 M, 1%
labeled) + P1–507 (66 M), P50N525 (80 M, 1% labeled) + P304–507 (200 M), P300N525 + P304–507 (290 M), and N1–525 + P1–507 (coexpressed in E. coli). (C) The phase separation
scaffold requires P50N525 and P304–507 domains. Mixtures of different N and P truncation mutants were tested for the ability to trigger phase separation using DIC microscopy.
“−” no phase separation events were observed; “+” phase separation events were observed; “NA” not tested. All mixtures were tested at several concentrations higher than 50 M
for each protein and several ratios including 1:1. Bottom panel represents coexpression of the full-length N and P proteins. (D) Picture of tubes with P50N525 and P304–507. Sample
with N and P mixed together becomes turbid. (E) Colocalization of P50N525-fluorescein (80 M, 1% labeled) and P304–507-Alexa Fluor 594 (200 M, 0.5% labeled) droplets.


providing clear evidence that LLPS has the ability to enhance viral                        ability to trigger phase separation (Fig. 1, A to C, and fig. S1). Several
function and supporting previous suggestions that LLPS is exploited                        mixtures formed condensed phases: P50N525 + P1–507, P304N525 + P304–507,
by negative-strand RNA viruses to create viral replication factories.                      and P50N525 + P304–507 (Fig. 1B). P50N525 + P304–507 was thus identified
                                                                                           as the minimal phase-separating system, forming spherical bi-
                                                                                           molecular condensates as measured by fluorescence microscopy
RESULTS                                                                                    (Fig. 1B) and showing increased turbidity (Fig. 1D). Further inves-
MeV N and P proteins phase separate upon mixing in vitro                                   tigations of MeV droplets were performed using this minimal system
Recombinant full-length P (P1–507) and an RNA-free N0P complex                             (P50N525 and P304–507) unless otherwise stated. P50N525 and P304–507
(P50N525) were separately expressed and mixed together and observed                        colocalize in droplets (Fig. 1E), and their phase transition was shown
to form micron-sized spherical structures (Fig. 1B). Phase separation                      to be salt dependent: Beyond 400 mM, fluorescent speckles are no
of P1–507 and full-length N was also demonstrated by coexpressing both                     longer observed (fig. S2).
proteins using separate plasmids in Escherichia coli. The full N0P complex                     The phase diagram of LLPS was established on the basis of
was purified in a high-salt buffer to prevent phase separation (vide infra)                turbidity (Fig. 2A), identifying threshold concentrations of 10 M
and diluted into low salt, resulting in phase separation as observed                       for both proteins, although fluorescence microscopy and negative-­
from differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy (Fig. 1B).                        stain electron microscopy reveal phase separation at lower protein
                                                                                           concentrations. Fluorescence microscopy indicates that proteins are
Identification of N and P domains that are required                                        homogeneously distributed within droplets (fig. S3).
for phase separation                                                                           The liquid-like behavior of droplets was confirmed by DIC
To identify which domains of MeV N and P are essential for phase                           microscopy via observation of fusion events with relaxation into
separation, we tested a panel of different N and P constructs for their                    spherical droplets (Fig. 2B and movie S1) and further demonstrated

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                                                 2 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE




                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
Fig. 2. MeV droplets exhibit liquid-like behavior. (A) Turbidity-based phase diagram as a function of P50N525 and P304–507 concentrations. Green shading represents ranges
of combinations of protein concentration that form droplets. Examples of fluorescent images at several N and P concentrations that show phase separation are presented
around the phase diagram. (B) Fusion events followed by relaxation into spherical droplets in a mixture comprising P304–507 (100 M) and P50N525 (10 M). (C) Images of FRAP
shows exchange of P50N525–fluorescein amidite between phases. (D) FRAP kinetics of P50N525 (25 M with 10 nM P50N525-fluorescein) in droplets formed with P304–507 at 1:2
ratio. (E) FRAP kinetics of P304–507 (50 M with 50 nM P304–507-fluorescein) in droplets formed with P50N525 at 2:1 ratio. (F and G) Fluorescence anisotropy of P50N525-fluorescein
(10 M P50N525, 500 nM P50N525-fluorescein) in the dilute phase (black) and in the presence of P304–507 under phase-separating conditions [N:P = 1:2 (dark green) and N:P = 1:4
(light green)]. Fluorescence lifetimes were measured at room temperature, (F) in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and (G) in buffer containing 500 mM NaCl that suppresses
phase separation but not the interaction between proteins. (H and I) Fluorescence anisotropy of P304–507-fluorescein (10 M, 500 nM P304–507-­fluorescein) in the dilute phase
(black) and in the presence of P50N525 at phase-separating conditions [P:N = 4:1 (dark green) and P:N 2:1 (light green)]. Fluorescence lifetimes were measured at room
temperature, (H) in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and (I) in buffer containing 500 mM NaCl that suppresses phase separation but not the interaction between proteins.

by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of fluorescein-­                      of significantly populated secondary structure with the exception of
labeled P50N525, showing recovery within seconds (Fig. 2, C and D).                        two regions with 20 and 10% -helical propensity around residues
FRAP of P protein is measurably slower (Fig. 2E), suggesting that                          406 and 433, respectively. 15N relaxation data also show that this
the branched multimeric P acts as a dynamic scaffold for the liquid                        domain is highly dynamic (fig. S5), although relaxation rates around
droplets (33). Rotational diffusion of proteins within droplets and                        regions 410 and 433 increased in constructs containing the tetrameric
in the surrounding phase was measured using time-resolved fluo-                            or XD domains (P377–507 and P304–507), probably due to slower rota-
rescence anisotropy. The rotational correlation time of P50N525 in                         tional tumbling. Carbon chemical shifts of P304–507 did not change
the presence of P304–507 was significantly slowed down compared to                         significantly in comparison with PLOOP, demonstrating that PLOOP
P50N525 in free solution (Fig. 2F), while there was no difference under                    remains disordered in the context of the construct that links the
conditions of high-salt buffer, which suppresses phase transition                          tetramerization domain and XD and that is required for phase separa-
but maintains interactions between the proteins (Fig. 2G). Similar                         tion (see fig. S6).
observations were measured for P304–507 in the free protein and in
the presence of P50N525 (Fig. 2, H and I). Both proteins therefore                         The NTAIL:PXD interaction is essential for droplet formation
remain liquid in the condensed phase, although their rotational                            The C-terminal domains of N and P are known to interact via residues
dynamics are slowed, possibly due to increased viscosity in the                            487 to 501 of NTAIL, which populates a conformational equilibrium
droplets. In summary, these results confirm that LLPS occurs under                         of partially folded helices in solution (34) and the XD domain of P.
near-physiological protein and salt concentrations upon mixing of                          The affinity of the MeV N TAIL and P XD (Phosphoprotein XD
full-length N- and the C-terminal domains of P in vitro, comple-                           domain) interaction (7, 11) under our experimental conditions is
menting recent in vivo observations (32).                                                  approximately 5 M (Fig. 3, A to C). This affinity was not measurably
                                                                                           dependent on salt concentration. The sole intermolecular hydrogen
PLOOP is intrinsically disordered                                                          bonding interaction observed in a chimeric crystal structure of
The conformational behavior of the region between the tetra­                               N486–505:PXD involves S491 of NTAIL interacting with K489 and D493
merization domain and XD, P377–457 (PLOOP), was analyzed using                             of PXD (7). Mutation of N (S491) has been shown to abrogate the
NMR spectroscopy. 13C, 15N, and 1H chemical shifts were combined                           NTAIL:PXD interaction—this is also the case under our experimental
with statistical coil sampling and ensemble selection approach                             conditions (Fig. 3D)—and to significantly decrease viral transcrip-
ASTEROIDS (fig. S4), revealing that this domain is essentially devoid                      tion in vivo (11). The critical nature of this interaction for LLPS was

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                                                 3 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE




                                                                                                                                                                                         Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
Fig. 3. Interaction between PXD and N460–525 is essential for MeV LLPS. (A) 1H-15N HSQC spectrum of free PXD (blue) and upon interaction with unlabeled N460–525 (red).
Concentration of PXD was 100 M in both cases, and the concentration of N460–525 was 20 M. Spectra were recorded at 850 MHz 1H frequency and 298 K. See Materials and
Methods for additional experimental conditions. (B) Isothermal titration calorimetry of PXD and N460–525 interaction. Raw injection heats (top) and the corresponding
specific binding isotherms (bottom) measured at 25°C are shown. PXD (845 M) was sequentially injected to N460–525 (70 M) in a microcalorimeter cell from 0 to 2.5 ratio.
Fitted parameters: ∆S = −10.7 cal mol−1 deg−1, ∆H = −10,460 ± 46.47 cal mol−1, N = 0.927 sites. (C) 15N CPMG relaxation dispersion of PXD (100 M) for residues 504 (top) and
509 (bottom) in the presence of 46% N460–525. CPMG frequencies were in the range from 31 to 1000 Hz. The experiments were recorded at a 1H frequency of 700 MHz
(black) and 950 MHz (red) at 25°C. Data were fitted simultaneously for residues R465, S466, I468, R472, R477, K478, Y480, K496, I504, and E509 with the two-state model,
pb = 23%, exchange rate (kex) = 285 ± 50 s−1. (D) Intensity ratio profiles of free versus PXD-bound N460–525 [wild type (WT)] (blue) and N460–525(S491L) (gray). The ratio
between N and P was 1:1 at 200 M concentration.



demonstrated via the S491L mutation, which resulted in suppression                      peak intensity was initially observed to decrease for both N and
of phase separation.                                                                    P with increasing stoichiometric ratio (N/P), with no noticeable
                                                                                        chemical shift differences. Similar observations were recently made
The PLOOP-N interaction modulates the dynamics                                          in mixtures of two interacting translational regulators (36). Apparent
of MeV droplets                                                                         rotational and transverse diffusion rates were similar to those mea-
An additional interaction between PLOOP and N was identified                            sured for free proteins (fig. S8). Rotational correlation times would
using NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 4, A and B), suggesting that the role                      be expected to increase significantly within droplets due to increased
of this domain, which is present in all constructs involved in phase                    viscosity (37). This result therefore suggests that observable signal
separation, involves a direct interaction with N rather than acting as                  derives from N and P in the dilute phase.
a simple spacer (35). Interactions centered on residues 409VLK411                           Decrease in resonance intensity of N and P is accompanied by
and 433LLK435 exhibit distinct affinities [estimated dissociation con-                  broadening of resonances from PXD and N483–505, due to the expected
stant (Kd) 264 and 606 M, respectively]. Mutation of 409VLK411 to                      interactions between P and N. Increasing the N:P ratio further
AAA inhibited this interaction (Fig. 4C) with N and modulated                           results in a minimum of total peak intensity at a ratio of approxi-
macroscale dynamic properties of droplets, as measured from FRAP,                       mately 0.15, followed by continual increase (Fig. 5). To follow the
but did not completely inhibit LLPS (Fig. 4D). Both 409VLK411                           apparent thermodynamics of droplet formation, intensities of 23 (N)
and 433LLK 435 exhibit high sequence conservation over MeV                              and 9 (P) nonoverlapping peaks corresponding to residues that are not
phosphoproteins (fig. S7).                                                              affected by the interaction under non–phase-separating conditions
                                                                                        were followed as a function of the concentration of N (concentra-
Investigating the thermodynamics of droplet formation                                   tion of P was held constant—see Materials and Methods). The ratio
using NMR                                                                               of N and P in droplets was estimated according to
To study interactions between proteins under phase-separating
conditions, we compared 15N heteronuclear single-quantum coherence                                    N
                                                                                                      ​ ​  D​​
                                                                                        	​​r​  D​​ = ​─        ​ = (​N​  TOT​​ − ​N​  OBS​​ ) / (​P​  TOT​​ − ​P​  OBS​)​ ​	      (1)
(HSQC) spectra of P304–507 and P50N525 separately and in different                                    ​P​  D​​
stoichiometric mixtures. Residues from 377 to 507 were observable
in the P304–507 spectrum, while NTAIL and flexible residues correspond-                    ND and PD refer to the apparent concentration of droplet-associated
ing to NARM and P1–50 were observable in P50N525 (Fig. 5). Overall                      protein, NTOT and PTOT refer to the total concentrations of P and N,

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                                                     4 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE




                                                                                                                                                                                Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
Fig. 4. Interaction of PLOOP with N modulates the dynamics of MeV liquid droplets. (A) 15N R2 of PLOOP (100 M) in the presence of P50N525 at different concentrations
at 600 MHz, 25°C. (B) Transverse 15N relaxation rates of the central residues of the two interaction regions in PLOOP (centered on residues 410 and 434, respectively). The
rates increase linearly as a function of concentration of added P50N525. (C) Intensity ratios of free versus P50N525-bound PLOOP (red) and PLOOP 409VLK411-AAA mutant (gray).
The ratio between N0P and P was 1:1; concentration was 100 M. (D) FRAP of P50N525-fluorescein with P304–507 (WT) (red) and P304–507 409VLK411-AAA (gray) in droplets. In
both cases, the concentration of P50N525 was 25 M; concentrations of P304–507 WT and 409VLK411-AAA mutant were 50 M, and entire droplets were photobleached.



and NOBS and POBS refer to the apparent concentrations in the liquid                    labeled N, resulting in the assembly of nucleocapsid-like parti-
phase that are observed by NMR. This analysis reveals a clear depen-                    cles. Assembly can be followed by detecting the appearance and in-
dence of rD on the total concentration of N, varying by nearly a factor                 creasing intensity of NMR signals from the P1–50 peptide that is
of 3 for total concentrations of N that vary between 7.5 and 75 M                      released upon assembly of the nucleocapsids (Fig. 6, C and D).
(Fig. 5 and table S1). This dependence indicates that a simple two-                     Comparison of the rate of increase of the NMR signals correspond-
state exchange mechanism cannot explain the experimental obser-                         ing to P1–50 in the condensed and dilute phase (in the absence of
vation and suggests that at least two steps are necessary to describe                   P304–507) unambiguously shows that nucleocapsid formation is ac-
the process of droplet formation.                                                       celerated in droplets at the same global concentration of N1–525.

RNA colocalizes to MeV droplets and triggers nucleocapsid
formation in guttala                                                                    DISCUSSION
The functional role of MeV LLPS was examined by adding short,                           Nonsegmented negative-sense RNA viruses are known to form
fluorescently labeled RNA decamers to samples containing droplets.                      inclusion bodies comprising proteins involved in the replication
Within seconds of adding the RNA, the fluorescence intensity of the                     machinery. The recent observation of colocalization of N and P of
droplets increased, starting from the perimeter (Fig. 6A and movie S2).                 both rabies (31) and measles (32) into liquid-like membraneless
This demonstrates that RNA localizes preferentially to the mem-                         puncta following infection suggests that this phenomenon may play
braneless organelles where it presumably interacts with the N:P                         a role in viral replication or transcription and that the phenomenon
complex. After incubation for 1 hour at 37°C, the samples were                          may be widespread throughout the Mononegavirales order and
examined using negative-stain electron microscopy, revealing the                        possibly related viruses. The formation of such membraneless
presence of assembled nucleocapsid-like structures (Fig. 6B).                           organelles has been proposed to enhance reaction rates by concen-
   To determine the rate of nucleocapsid assembly, we used real-­                       trating interaction partners in a confined volume, for storage purposes
time NMR. This approach has recently been used to observe the                           or, in the case of viral organelles, to provide protection from the host
kinetics of assembly of nucleocapsid-like particles in the dilute                       immune system. Investigating the role of this poorly understood
phase (13). Nonfluorescently labeled RNA hexamers comprising six                        phenomenon is essential to understanding the viral cycle. Describing
adenines were added to the droplet suspension comprising 15N-­                          the physical mechanisms that underlie their formation and stability

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                                           5 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

                 A




                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
                 B                                              C                                                   D




Fig. 5. Thermodynamics of MeV NP phase separation. (A) 1H-15N HSQC of 15N-labeled P50N525 and P304–507 at different admixtures of the two proteins; all spectra were
recorded at 850 MHz, 25°C. P304–507 concentration was 75 M, and P50N525 concentration varies from 5 to 100% of 75 M. (B) Concentration of P50N525 and P304–507 proteins
in the dilute phase derived from the spectra shown in (A). (C) Comparison of concentrations of droplet-associated P50N525 and P304–507 in the sensitive volume, estimated
on the basis of observation of protein in the dilute phase [derived from analysis of spectra shown in (A)]. Total concentration of P in the mixture was 75 M. (D) Schematic
representation of droplet formation upon mixing P50N525 and P304–507.



represents a significant challenge, particularly if one considers their                verify that this minimal in vitro system reproduces the characteristic
potential as targets of viral inhibition. To provide molecular insight                 colocalization of N and P in membraneless organelles that has been
into these aspects, we aimed to recreate the phenomenon of LLPS                        observed in infected cells.
involving MeV N and P proteins in vitro.                                                  We also identified the interaction between the helical motif of
    We first demonstrated LLPS of N and P under conditions where                       NTAIL and XD to be essential for phase separation. These results align
neither protein undergoes phase separation alone. Expression of in-                    closely with data measured in vivo on cells infected with rabies (31)
dependent domains and combinations of domains then allowed us                          and more recently MeV (32). The NTAIL:PXD interaction has previously
to identify the regions of N and P that are necessary for droplet                      been associated with transport of the polymerase complex to the
formation in vitro. This revealed that apart from the first 50 amino                   nucleocapsid before replication and transcription (10, 12, 38, 39). Here,
acids of P that chaperone N, the rest of the 300–amino acid dis-                       we demonstrate that at least one role of this interaction involves the
ordered PTAIL is dispensable for LLPS, while the tetramerization                       free-energy stabilization of LLPS. Mutation of a single residue (S491L)
domain of P, the hitherto uncharacterized disordered domain PLOOP,                     that is known to mediate the interaction between NTAIL and PXD, and to
and the three-helix bundle XD are all essential. N cannot be purified                  strongly affect replication in vivo (11), results in abrogation of LLPS.
in an isolated form, owing to the propensity of the protein to bind                        Additional weak interactions between PLOOP and N are also shown
to cellular RNA and form nucleocapsid-­like structures. We therefore                   to modulate the fluidity of the droplets, suggesting that polyvalency
purified a chaperoned form of N bound to the N-terminal peptide                        of N:P interactions plays a role in droplet formation. The impor-
of P, which maintains N in a monomeric, unassembled form (N0P).                        tance of both disordered and folded, or partially folded domains in the
LLPS only occurs when N0P comprising the full-length N protein,                        polyvalent complex that stabilizes the MeV droplets invokes their
including both NCORE and the 125–amino acid disordered NTAIL, is                       possible roles as “stickers” and “spacers” (40), which assure the non-
present. Full-length N and P were also coexpressed, and the integral                   covalent binding and physical separation of interacting components,
N0P complex was shown to undergo LLPS. Overall, these results                          respectively. Nevertheless, the role of PLOOP appears to be more

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                                          6 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE




                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
Fig. 6. Nucleocapsid assembly occurs in liquid droplets and is enhanced by phase separation. (A) Fluorescence microscopy images showing fluorescently labeled
RNA diffusing into droplets preformed by mixing P50N525 (20 M) and P304–507 (80 M); RNA of 200 M (with 10% fluorescently labeled) was added on one side of the
coverslip and spontaneously diffused in the sample. (B) Negative-stain electron microscopy of the sample shown in (A), after 1 hour of incubation at 37°C. (C) Kinetic
traces of peak intensities corresponding to individual residues of P1–50 in SOFAST 1H-15N HMQC spectra acquired at a resolution of 8.5 min (8 scans, 200 15N increments,
and 1024 1H), following addition of OH-A6-OH RNA to P50N525 (gray) and under phase-separating conditions with P304–507 (green) at 293 K. Data were fitted with a biexpo-
nential function as previously described (13). (D) Averaged intensities for residues E4, K10, N11, G12, E14, C15, I16, G25, S26, L27, I29, A32, M33, A35, D41, N42, G44, and
Q45 of P1–50 in P50N525 (gray) and under phase-separating conditions with P304–507 (green). Dots with SD represent experimental data, and lines represent biexponential
fit. (E) Rate of assembly of nucleocapsids as measured by the appearance of resonances from P50 when assembled using P50N525 (gray) and when using P50N525 + P304–507
(green) having formed droplets. The concentration of P50N525 and RNA was constant in both cases.



complex than this as the impact of this interaction on the nature of                       Replication and transcription of negative-strand RNA viruses
MeV droplets suggests that it is capable of fulfilling both roles.                     are thought to occur within inclusion bodies comprising N, P, and L.
    Using NMR spectroscopy, we are able to investigate the thermo-                     The colocalization of these proteins within liquid droplets may act
dynamic equilibrium between dilute and condensed phases in the                         to increase local concentration of the components of the viral repli-
presence of MeV LLPS by comparing the rate of increase in signal                       cation machinery, thereby increasing replication efficiency. We have
intensity from NTAIL and the decrease in intensity of signal from                      therefore investigated whether the liquid droplets formed upon
PLOOP and XD, as a function of the concentration of N. Assuming                        mixing of N and P in vitro are capable of supporting nucleocapsid
that all signal derives from the dilute phase (as evidenced by rota-                   assembly, which is an essential part of the viral replication process.
tional and translational diffusion measurements) and that signal                       We previously demonstrated that assembly can be observed in the
drop results uniquely from slow exchange with an invisible form of                     dilute phase, by adding RNA to monomeric N0P and using NMR
each protein in droplets, our observations suggest that the stoichio­                  spectroscopy and fluorescence anisotropy to monitor the rate of
metry of N and P within droplets depends on the ratio of the two                       assembly (13). By adding RNA to a suspension of N:P organelles,
proteins in the mixture. As the experimental data cannot be ex-                        we show that RNA molecules preferentially localize to the droplets
plained using a simple one-step reaction, it is interesting to specu-                  and, once within the droplets, trigger assembly of nucleocapsid-like
late on the nature of the second interaction. One possible explanation                 particles. Notably, the rate of assembly is significantly increased
involves N interacting with P to form droplets, with additional re-                    compared to non–phase-separating conditions, providing evidence
cruitment of N to existing N:P droplets. Such a model would be                         that LLPS has the ability to enhance viral function and offering a
in agreement with the critical presence of the tetramerization                         first glimpse of these viral factories in action. This also indicates that
domain and the polyvalency of the four branched dynamic XD in-                         the condensed nature of the droplets does not restrict the ability to
teraction sites, which may form a dynamic scaffold in MeV LLPS to                      assemble these very large superstructures and demonstrates that these
which additional N could be recruited. Note that both P and N                          minimalist N:P droplets are sufficient to promote one of the essen-
remain dynamic in the context of the droplets, as evidenced by the                     tial processes of viral replication. In this context, we note that nucleo-
rotational diffusion measured by fluorescence anisotropy. The                          capsid structures were observed to be ejected from liquid droplets
proposed role of P as a dynamic scaffold is supported by the ob-                       formed in cells infected with rabies virus (31).
servation of differential translational mobility of P within droplets                      Phosphorylation of P and N have both been reported to affect
with respect to N, as reported by FRAP. More experimental mea-                         MeV function (41, 42) and, more recently, to influence the nature of
surements on this system are required to better characterize these                     liquid droplet formation in vivo (32). Although both N and P were
molecular processes.                                                                   purified from E. coli in their unmodified forms, the technology

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                                          7 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

described here will allow us to investigate the impact of phosphorylation    stopped by adding 5 mM DTT, and proteins were separated from
in future studies. In particular, the role of the 300–amino acid dis-        the excess dye by SEC (Superdex 75/200) in NMR buffer. SDS–
ordered PTAIL domain may become clearer as this comprises numerous           polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gels are shown in fig. S1.
phosphorylation sites but is not essential for LLPS. This experimental
system will also allow us to investigate the role of host proteins that      RNA
are thought to enter inclusion bodies and the viral proteins C and L.        All RNAs were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies
    In conclusion, we have demonstrated that purified N and P MeV            (Leuven, Belgium), and all were terminated with OH at both 3′ and
proteins form liquid-like membraneless organelles upon mixing                5′ or with fluorescein amidite at the 3′ end.
in vitro. We identify weak interactions involving intrinsically disor-
dered domains of N and P that are implicated in this process and             Droplet assembly and turbidity assay
identify one interaction between the C-terminal domains as essential         P and N constructs were first mixed and then diluted with buffer;
to phase separation. P protein appears to play a role as a multivalent       thus, the final NaCl concentration was 150 mM (unless different NaCl
scaffold stabilizing the droplets. The droplets exhibit both physical        concentration is stated). Samples were incubated at room temperature
and functional features characteristic of paramyxoviral inclusion            for 5 min, and absorbance at 395 nm was read on a NanoDrop 2000c
bodies: RNA colocalizes to the droplets and thereby triggers assembly        spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). An
of N protomers into nucleocapsid-like particles that encapsidate the         absorbance value higher than 0.1 was interpreted as a presence of
RNA. The ability to reproduce mechanistic behavior of MeV facto-             phase separation in the system.
ries in vitro will allow us to further examine the role of additional
host and viral partners at the molecular level. The observation that         Microscopy imaging




                                                                                                                                                       Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
similar puncta or inclusion bodies have been found for numerous              Samples were imaged using either DIC or epifluorescence on an Olympus
negative-strand RNA viruses, including filoviruses and pneumoviruses,        IX81 inverted microscope. Fluorescence signal was acquired using a
suggests that the observations made here may be of general interest          485(20)-nm (fluorescein) or a 560(25)-nm (Alexa Fluor 594) excitation
in understanding the molecular basis of mononegaviral infection.             filter combined with a 525(30)-nm or a 607(36)-nm emission filter,
                                                                             respectively. Excitation light (Metal-Halide X-Cite 120) and emission
                                                                             wavelengths are split using a 4X4M-B quadriband dichroic mirror
MATERIALS AND METHODS                                                        (Semrock). Oil immersion objectives 60× [Olympus PlanAPON60,
Protein expression, purification, and mutagenesis                            1.42 numerical aperture (NA)] or 100× (Olympus UPLFLN, 1.3 NA)
All P and N constructs were cloned into pET41c(+) between the                were used for imaging, and a Hamamatsu Orca Flash4.0-V2 sCMOS
Nde I and Xho I cleavage sites, where the Xho I site was ligated with        (scientific Complementary Metal-Oxyde Semiconductor) 2048 × 2048
a cleaved Sal I site of the insert, yielding a construct with a C-terminal   camera was used for detection. The acquisition and data analysis
8His-tag (5). All constructs were expressed in E. coli Rosetta               were performed with Volocity (Quorum Technologies) software.
TM(lDE3)/pRARE (Novagen) overnight at 20°C after induction at an
optical density of 0.6 with 1 mM isopropyl--d-thiogalactopyranoside.        Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
N525 was cotransformed with P1–507 and purified in complex. Cells            FRAP was measured using an Olympus IX81 spinning-disk confocal
were lysed by sonication and subjected to standard Ni purification           microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSUX1 spinning disk head
in 20 mM tris (pH 8.0) and 150 mM NaCl or 500 mM NaCl for XD                 and using diode-pumped solid-state lasers 488 nm (50 mW Coherent
containing constructs. The protein was eluted with 20 mM tris (pH 8),        Sapphire) and 561 nm (100 mW Cobolt JIVE4). Emission is filtered
150/500 mM NaCl, and 500 mM imidazole and then concentrated                  through a 520(28)-nm filter for fluorescein. Acquisition is performed
and subjected to size exclusion chromatography (SEC, Superdex 75/200)        with an iXon Ultra EMCCD (Electron Multiplying Charge-Coupled
in 50 mM Na-phosphate (pH 6.0), 150/500 mM NaCl, and 2 mM                    Device) (Andor) 512 × 512 pixel camera. FRAP was restricted to
dithiothreitol (DTT) buffer (NMR buffer). The P50N525, P50N405,              a region of interest, defined graphically, with a galvanometric
P300N525, and P300N405 were produced as described previously (13, 14).       FRAP/PA device (Andor) using the same lasers used for imaging
Mutation of S491L in N and of 409VLK411→AAA in P were inserted               with AOTF (Acousto-Optic Tunable Filter) 15% and with a dwell
by site-directed mutagenesis, and P50N525 (S491L), N460–525 (S491L),         time of 50 ms for 10 repeats before bleaching and with a 2-s interval
P304–507 (409VLK411→AAA), and P377–507 (409VLK411→AAA) were                  for 40 repeats after. The laser power and the dwell time during bleach-
produced and purified in the same way as wild-type proteins.                 ing were optimized to bleach 50% of the initial fluorescence intensity.
    Expression of unlabeled protein was performed in LB medium.              Images were analyzed using FIJI and python plugin ImageFRAP
Proteins labeled for NMR (15N and 13C) were expressed under the              (https://imagej.net/Analyze_FRAP_movies_with_a_Jython_script);
same conditions in M9 minimal medium. Cysteine mutations for                 the recovery was fitted with a single exponent.
fluorescence labeling were performed by site-directed mutagenesis
into the constructs where previously all native cysteines were ex-           Fluorescence anisotropy
changed to alanines. Mutant proteins were expressed and purified             Fluorescence anisotropy decays were measured using a Mini-Tau
in the same way as wild type and concentrated to around 100 M.              fluorescence lifetime spectrometer (Edinburgh Instruments, UK)
The proteins were then labeled using maleimide chemistry (43).               equipped with a 450-nm picosecond pulsed diode laser and a TCC2
Briefly, the protein was incubated overnight with 10 mM DTT, then            electronics module for time-correlated single photon counting.
dialyzed against 50 mM Na-phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) and 150/500 mM           Photons were detected using a high-speed photon multiplier tube
NaCl in two steps, and mixed with 5× excess of maleimide dye (flu-           (Hamamatsu H10720-01). The sample was excited with vertically
orescein or Alexa Fluor 594) solubilized in dimethyl sulfoxide. After        polarized light, and parallel and perpendicular polarized fluorescence
2 hours of incubation at room temperature, the labeling reaction was         light was detected during 120 s sequentially. Histograms of photon

Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                   8 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

arrival times were generated from every measurement, and anisotropy          the calculated Kd value was estimated by error propagation from the
decays were calculated according to r(t) = (Ipar(t) − GIper(t))/(Ipar(t) +   fitting error of pB and assuming a 5% error in concentration deter-
2GIper(t)), with Ipar/Iper being the intensities of parallel/perpendicular   mination of both proteins.
polarized light per time unit and G being the correcting factor for
detection differences between the two detection pathways. The G              NMR measurements of phase-separating samples
                                                                             15
factor was measured for each buffer condition using the free dye.              N-labeled P50N525 and P304–507 were premixed at different ratios
                                                                             and diluted in buffer so that the final NaCl concentration was 150 mM
Isothermal titration calorimetry                                             and then loaded in a 3-mm NMR tube. 1H-15N HSQCs and R1
Isothermal titration calorimetry was measured using iMicroCal                experiments were measured as described for non–phase-separating
iTC200 at 25°C. The titration experiment was performed by adding             samples. Pulsed field gradient NMR diffusion experiments were
2 l of aliquots of 500 M PXD into the microcalorimeter cell filled         measured using 15N-edited stimulated-echo diffusion experiments
with 50 M NTAIL. PXD was titrated through 20 injections with 180-s          using a 300-ms diffusion delay at 16 to 20 gradient strengths ranging
intervals in between; the reaction mixture was continuously stirred          linearly from 0 to 0.55 T m−1 (52). 1H-15N HSQCs used for the devel-
at 750 rpm. The titration curve was fitted to the experimental data          opment of the kinetic model were measured using both P50N525 and
using the Origin version 7.0 software from MicroCal.                         P304–507 15N-labeled samples at a constant P304–507 concentration of 75 M
                                                                             and P50N525 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100%. The concentration of P50N525
NMR spectroscopy                                                             and P304–507 in the dilute and condensed phase was estimated on the basis
All experiments were acquired in NMR buffer at 25°C. The spectral            of intensities of 23 for P50N525 and 9 for P304–507 nonoverlapping and
assignment of P50N525 at pH 6.0 was verified on the basis of published       noninteracting peaks, which were summed and normalized by the




                                                                                                                                                                               Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
assignment at pH 7.0 (13) using 13C, 15N-labeled samples using a set         intensities of the peaks in the spectra of the individual proteins. The
of BEST-TROSY triple resonance experiments.                                  amount of each protein in droplets was then estimated by subtraction.
    The spectral assignments of 13C- and 15N-labeled P377–457 and            This allows us to estimate the concentration of droplet-­associated N
P457–507 constructs were obtained using sets of triple resonance ex-         and P in the sensitive NMR volume (but not in droplets as we do
periments correlating Ca, Cb, and CO resonances at a 1H frequency            not know the volume of droplets). We can then estimate the ratio of
of 600 MHz. NMRPipe (44) was used to process the spectra, and                N and P associated to droplets as a function of concentration of N.
automatic assignment was performed with the program MARS and
manually verified (45). Secondary chemical shifts were calculated            Nucleocapsid assembly by NMR
using the random coil values from refDB (46).                                Kinetics of P50N525 (alone or in the presence of P304–507 or P377–507)
                                                                             nucleocapsid assembly were followed using NMR spectroscopy using
Ensemble analysis of PLOOP                                                   the same procedure as previously described (13). Time resolution was
The genetic algorithm ASTEROIDS selected representative ensembles            approximately 8 min. The assembly process was initiated by adding
[fitting 1H, 15N, and 13C(Ca, Cb, and CO) backbone chemical shifts].         six-nucleotide RNA (OH-A6-OH), and its time trace was followed
A 10,000-member ensemble of PLOOP was generated using the statis-            by measuring intensities of resonances from P1–50 on SOFAST
tical coil model Flexible Meccano (47), and 200-conformer ensembles          HMQC spectra. Assembly rates were obtained by averaging intensities
matching experimental backbone chemical shifts were selected                 of 18 peaks and fitting them with a biexponential function; mean
from this ensemble using the ASTEROIDS genetic algorithm as                  assembly rates were calculated as follows: k1*a1 + k2*a2, where k1
previously described (48, 49).                                               and k2 are rates, a1 and a2 are their amplitudes.

Calculation of apparent Kd values from NMR experiments                       Negative-stain electron microscopy
for the interaction between N and PLOOP/PXD                                  The nucleocapsid-like particles used for negative-stain electron
15
  N R1 relaxation rates were obtained by sampling the decay of magnet­       microscopy were obtained by adding 50 M RNA (HO-A6-OH) to
ization (seven delays between 0 and 1.71 s). R1 relaxation rates were       droplets formed by mixing 20 M P50N525 and 80 M P304–507 in a
measured using seven delay times between 0.001 and 0.24 s. The               final volume of 20 l. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at 37°C,
spin-lock field was 1500 Hz, and R2 was calculated from R1 and R1,          then applied to the clean side of carbon on mica (carbon/mica inter-
considering the resonance offset. The residue-specific apparent Kd           face), and stained with 2% sodium silicotungstate (pH 7.0). Micro-
values for P377–457 and N were calculated from 15N relaxation as             graphs were taken with a T12 FEI microscope at 120 kV and a
described elsewhere (50). P377–507 concentration remained constant           magnification of 30,000.
(100 M), and N concentration varied from 0 to 140 M. The rota-
tional correlation time of the complex was assumed to be equal to c         SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
of P50N525 alone and was estimated from its molecular weight.                Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
   15                                                                        content/full/6/14/eaaz7095/DC1
      N relaxation dispersion was measured at a P457–507 concentra-
tion of 100 M in the presence of 70 and 30 M unlabeled NTAIL at            View/request a protocol for this paper from Bio-protocol.
700 and 850 MHz and using 14 points at CPMG frequencies between
31 and 1000 Hz with a constant-time relaxation of 32 ms (51). Data           REFERENCES AND NOTES
for nine residues and two fields were fitted simultaneously using              1. C. I. Paules, H. D. Marston, A. S. Fauci, Measles in 2019—Going backward. N. Engl. J. Med.
ChemEx (https://github.com/gbouvignies/chemex) and a two-state                    380, 2185–2187 (2019).
                                                                               2. J. Curran, D. Kolakofsky, Replication of paramyxoviruses. Adv. Virus Res. 54, 403–422
exchange model. The population of P457–507 bound to N460–525 (pB)                 (1999).
and the exchange rate (kex) were obtained from the fit, and the Kd             3. R. Cox, R. K. Plemper, The paramyxovirus polymerase complex as a target for next-
was calculated assuming a 1:1 binding stoichiometry. The error of                 generation anti-paramyxovirus therapeutics. Front. Microbiol. 6, 459 (2015).


Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095   1 April 2020                                                                                                           9 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

 4. S. Longhi, V. Receveur-Bréchot, D. Karlin, K. Johansson, H. Darbon, D. Bhella, R. Yeo,                  interact and provide the minimal requirements for inclusion body formation. J. Gen. Virol.
    S. Finet, B. Canard, The C-terminal domain of the measles virus nucleoprotein is                        89, 2698–2708 (2008).
    intrinsically disordered and folds upon binding to the C-terminal moiety of the phosphoprotein.   27.   M. Omi-Furutani, M. Yoneda, K. Fujita, F. Ikeda, C. Kai, Novel phosphoprotein-interacting
    J. Biol. Chem. 278, 18638–18648 (2003).                                                                 region in Nipah virus nucleocapsid protein and its involvement in viral replication.
 5. S. Milles, M. R. Jensen, C. Lazert, S. Guseva, S. Ivashchenko, G. Communie, D. Maurin,                  J. Virol. 84, 9793–9799 (2010).
    D. Gerlier, R. W. H. Ruigrok, M. Blackledge, An ultraweak interaction in the intrinsically        28.   D. Ma, C. X. George, J. L. Nomburg, C. K. Pfaller, R. Cattaneo, C. E. Samuel, Upon infection,
    disordered replication machinery is essential for measles virus function. Sci. Adv. 4,                  cellular WD repeat-containing protein 5 (WDR5) localizes to cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
    eaat7778 (2018).                                                                                        and enhances measles virus replication. J. Virol. 92, e01726-17 (2018).
 6. G. Communie, T. Crépin, D. Maurin, M. R. Jensen, M. Blackledge, R. W. H. Ruigrok,                 29.   D. Spehner, R. Drillien, P. M. Howley, The assembly of the measles virus nucleoprotein
    Structure of the tetramerization domain of measles virus phosphoprotein. J. Virol. 87,                  into nucleocapsid-like particles is modulated by the phosphoprotein. Virology 232,
    7166–7169 (2013).                                                                                       260–268 (1997).
 7. R. L. Kingston, D. J. Hamel, L. S. Gay, F. W. Dahlquist, B. W. Matthews, Structural basis         30.   Y. Nakatsu, M. Takeda, S. Ohno, Y. Shirogane, M. Iwasaki, Y. Yanagi, Measles virus
    for the attachment of a paramyxoviral polymerase to its template. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.         circumvents the host interferon response by different actions of the C and V proteins.
    101, 8301–8306 (2004).                                                                                  J. Virol. 82, 8296–8306 (2008).
 8. S. G. Guryanov, L. Liljeroos, P. Kasaragod, T. Kajander, S. J. Butcher, Crystal structure         31.   J. Nikolic, R. Le Bars, Z. Lama, N. Scrima, C. Lagaudrière-Gesbert, Y. Gaudin, D. Blondel, Negri
    of the measles virus nucleoprotein core in complex with an N-terminal region of                         bodies are viral factories with properties of liquid organelles. Nat. Commun. 8, 58 (2017).
    phosphoprotein. J. Virol. 90, 2849–2857 (2015).                                                   32.   Y. Zhou, J. M. Su, C. E. Samuel, D. Ma, Measles virus forms inclusion bodies with properties
 9. I. Gutsche, A. Desfosses, G. Effantin, W. L. Ling, M. Haupt, R. W. H. Ruigrok, C. Sachse,               of liquid organelles. J. Virol. 93, e00948-19 (2019).
    G. Schoehn, Near-atomic cryo-EM structure of the helical measles virus nucleocapsid.              33.   E. Boke, M. Ruer, M. Wühr, M. Coughlin, R. Lemaitre, S. P. Gygi, S. Alberti, D. Drechsel,
    Science 348, 704–707 (2015).                                                                            A. A. Hyman, T. J. Mitchison, Amyloid-like self-assembly of a cellular compartment.
10. S. Gely, D. F. Lowry, C. Bernard, M. R. Jensen, M. Blackledge, S. Costanzo, J.-M. Bourhis,              Cell 166, 637–650 (2016).
    H. Darbon, G. Daughdrill, S. Longhi, Solution structure of the C-terminal X domain                34.   M. R. Jensen, G. Communie, E. A. Ribeiro Jr., N. Martinez, A. Desfosses, L. Salmon,
    of the measles virus phosphoprotein and interaction with the intrinsically disordered                   L. Mollica, F. Gabel, M. Jamin, S. Longhi, R. W. H. Ruigrok, M. Blackledge, Intrinsic disorder




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020
    C-terminal domain of the nucleoprotein. J. Mol. Recognit. 23, 435–447 (2010).                           in measles virus nucleocapsids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 9839–9844 (2011).
11. L.-M. Bloyet, J. Brunel, M. Dosnon, V. Hamon, J. Erales, A. Gruet, C. Lazert, C. Bignon,          35.   J. Wang, J.-M. Choi, A. S. Holehouse, H. O. Lee, X. Zhang, M. Jahnel, S. Maharana,
    P. Roche, S. Longhi, D. Gerlier, Modulation of re-initiation of measles virus transcription at          R. Lemaitre, A. Pozniakovsky, D. Drechsel, I. Poser, R. V. Pappu, S. Alberti, A. A. Hyman,
    intergenic regions by PXD to NTAIL binding strength. PLOS Pathog. 12, e1006058 (2016).                  A molecular grammar governing the driving forces for phase separation of prion-like RNA
12. V. Du Pont, Y. Jiang, R. K. Plemper, Bipartite interface of the measles virus phosphoprotein            binding proteins. Cell 174, 688–699.e16 (2018).
    X domain with the large polymerase protein regulates viral polymerase dynamics.                   36.   T. H. Kim, B. Tsang, R. M. Vernon, N. Sonenberg, L. E. Kay, J. D. Forman-Kay, Phospho-
    PLOS Pathog. 15, e1007995 (2019).                                                                       dependent phase separation of FMRP and CAPRIN1 recapitulates regulation
13. S. Milles, M. R. Jensen, G. Communie, D. Maurin, G. Schoehn, R. W. H. Ruigrok,                          of translation and deadenylation. Science 365, 825–829 (2019).
    M. Blackledge, Self-assembly of measles virus nucleocapsid-like particles: Kinetics               37.   W. Adamski, N. Salvi, D. Maurin, J. Magnat, S. Milles, M. R. Jensen, A. Abyzov, C. J. Moreau,
    and RNA sequence dependence. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 55, 9356–9360 (2016).                          M. Blackledge, A unified description of intrinsically disordered protein dynamics under
14. A. Desfosses, S. Milles, M. R. Jensen, S. Guseva, J.-P. Colletier, D. Maurin, G. Schoehn,               physiological conditions using NMR spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 17817–17829
    I. Gutsche, R. W. H. Ruigrok, M. Blackledge, Assembly and cryo-EM structures of RNA-                    (2019).
    specific measles virus nucleocapsids provide mechanistic insight into paramyxoviral               38.   S. Longhi, L.-M. Bloyet, S. Gianni, D. Gerlier, How order and disorder within paramyxoviral
    replication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 4256–4264 (2019).                                       nucleoproteins and phosphoproteins orchestrate the molecular interplay of transcription
15. Y. Shin, C. P. Brangwynne, Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease.                    and replication. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 74, 3091–3118 (2017).
    Science 357, eaaf4382 (2017).                                                                     39.   J. Brunel, D. Chopy, M. Dosnon, L.-M. Bloyet, P. Devaux, E. Urzua, R. Cattaneo, S. Longhi,
16. S. F. Banani, H. O. Lee, A. A. Hyman, M. K. Rosen, Biomolecular condensates: Organizers                 D. Gerlier, Sequence of events in measles virus replication: Role of phosphoprotein-
    of cellular biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 285–298 (2017).                                 nucleocapsid interactions. J. Virol. 88, 10851–10863 (2014).
17. T. J. Nott, T. D. Craggs, A. J. Baldwin, Membraneless organelles can melt nucleic acid            40.   A. E. Posey, A. S. Holehouse, R. V. Pappu, Phase separation of intrinsically disordered
    duplexes and act as biomolecular filters. Nat. Chem. 8, 569–575 (2016).                                 proteins. Methods Enzymol. 611, 1–30 (2018).
18. M.-T. Wei, S. Elbaum-Garfinkle, A. S. Holehouse, C. C.-H. Chen, M. Feric, C. B. Arnold,           41.   A. Sugai, H. Sato, M. Yoneda, C. Kai, Phosphorylation of measles virus phosphoprotein at
    R. D. Priestley, R. V. Pappu, C. P. Brangwynne, Phase behaviour of disordered proteins                  S86 and/or S151 downregulates viral transcriptional activity. FEBS Lett. 586, 3900–3907
    underlying low density and high permeability of liquid organelles. Nat. Chem. 9,                        (2012).
    1118–1125 (2017).                                                                                 42.   A. Sugai, H. Sato, M. Yoneda, C. Kai, Phosphorylation of measles virus nucleoprotein
19. R. R. Novoa, G. Calderita, R. Arranz, J. Fontana, H. Granzow, C. Risco, Virus factories:                affects viral growth by changing gene expression and genomic RNA stability. J. Virol. 87,
    Associations of cell organelles for viral replication and morphogenesis. Biol. Cell 97,                 11684–11692 (2013).
    147–172 (2005).                                                                                   43.   E. A. Lemke, Site-specific labeling of proteins for single-molecule FRET measurements
20. C. Netherton, K. Moffat, E. Brooks, T. Wileman, A guide to viral inclusions, membrane                   using genetically encoded ketone functionalities. Methods Mol. Biol. 751, 3–15 (2011).
    rearrangements, factories, and viroplasm produced during virus replication. Adv. Virus Res.       44.   F. Delaglio, S. Grzesiek, G. Vuister, G. Zhu, J. Pfeifer, A. Bax, NMRPipe: A multidimensional
    70, 101–182 (2007).                                                                                     spectral processing system based on UNIX Pipes. J. Biomol. NMR 6, 277–293 (1995).
21. X. Lahaye, A. Vidy, C. Pomier, L. Obiang, F. Harper, Y. Gaudin, D. Blondel, Functional            45.   Y.-S. Jung, M. Zweckstetter, Mars—Robust automatic backbone assignment of proteins.
    characterization of Negri Bodies (NBs) in rabies virus-infected cells: Evidence that NBs are            J. Biomol. NMR 30, 11–23 (2004).
    sites of viral transcription and replication. J. Virol. 83, 7948–7958 (2009).                     46.   H. Zhang, S. Neal, D. S. Wishart, RefDB: A database of uniformly referenced protein
22. B. S. Heinrich, Z. Maliga, D. A. Stein, A. A. Hyman, S. P. J. Whelan, Phase transitions drive           chemical shifts. J. Biomol. NMR 25, 173–195 (2003).
    the formation of vesicular stomatitis virus replication compartments. MBio 9, e02290-17           47.   V. Ozenne, F. Bauer, L. Salmon, J.-r. Huang, M. R. Jensen, S. Segard, P. Bernadó,
    (2018).                                                                                                 C. Charavay, M. Blackledge, Flexible-meccano: A tool for the generation of explicit
23. V. Rincheval, M. Lelek, E. Gault, C. Bouillier, D. Sitterlin, S. Blouquit-Laye, M. Galloux,             ensemble descriptions of intrinsically disordered proteins and their associated
    C. Zimmer, J.-F. Eleouet, M.-A. Rameix-Welti, Functional organization of cytoplasmic                    experimental observables. Bioinformatics 28, 1463–1470 (2012).
    inclusion bodies in cells infected by respiratory syncytial virus. Nat. Commun. 8, 563            48.   G. Nodet, L. Salmon, V. Ozenne, S. Meier, M. R. Jensen, M. Blackledge, Quantitative
    (2017).                                                                                                 description of backbone conformational sampling of unfolded proteins at amino acid
24. S. Zhang, L. Chen, G. Zhang, Q. Yan, X. Yang, B. Ding, Q. Tang, S. Sun, Z. Hu, M. Chen, An              resolution from NMR residual dipolar couplings. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131, 17908–17918
    amino acid of human parainfluenza virus type 3 nucleoprotein is critical for template                   (2009).
    function and cytoplasmic inclusion body formation. J. Virol. 87, 12457–12470 (2013).              49.   M. R. Jensen, L. Salmon, G. Nodet, M. Blackledge, Defining conformational ensembles
25. B. Precious, D. F. Young, A. Bermingham, R. Fearns, M. Ryan, R. E. Randall, Inducible                   of intrinsically disordered and partially folded proteins directly from chemical shifts.
    expression of the P, V, and NP genes of the paramyxovirus simian virus 5 in cell lines                  J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 1270–1272 (2010).
    and an examination of NP-P and NP-V interactions. J. Virol. 69, 8001–8010 (1995).                 50.   S. Milles, D. Mercadante, I. V. Aramburu, M. R. Jensen, N. Banterle, C. Koehler, S. Tyagi, J. Clarke,
26. A. Derdowski, T. R. Peters, N. Glover, R. Qian, T. J. Utley, A. Burnett, J. V. Williams,                S. L. Shammas, M. Blackledge, F. Gräter, E. A. Lemke, Plasticity of an ultrafast interaction
    P. Spearman, J. E. Crowe Jr., Human metapneumovirus nucleoprotein and phosphoprotein                    between nucleoporins and nuclear transport receptors. Cell 163, 734–745 (2015).



Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095        1 April 2020                                                                                                                                      10 of 11


SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

51. D. F. Hansen, P. Vallurupalli, L. E. Kay, An improved 15N relaxation dispersion experiment   contributions: S.G. carried out experiments and analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript.
    for the measurement of millisecond time-scale dynamics in proteins. J. Phys. Chem. B 112,    S.M. supervised experimental and analytical aspects. J.-P.K. assisted in the imaging
    5898–5904 (2008).                                                                            experiments. D.M. prepared proteins and participated in imaging experiments. M.R.J.
52. C. A. Waudby, M. D. Mantle, L. D. Cabrita, L. F. Gladden, C. M. Dobson, J. Christodoulou,    supervised experimental and analytical aspects. N.S. provided expertise in analytical and
    Rapid distinction of intracellular and extracellular proteins using NMR diffusion            experimental aspects. R.W.H.R. and M.B. conceptualized and supervised the project and wrote
    measurements. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 11312–11315 (2012).                                     the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing
                                                                                                 interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the
Acknowledgments: IBS acknowledges integration into the Interdisciplinary Research Institute      paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to
of Grenoble (CEA). Funding: This work was supported by the European Research Council             this paper may be requested from the authors.
Advanced Grant DynamicAssemblies to M.B., GRAL (ANR-10-LABX-49-01), Finovi, and the
Fondation Recherche Medicale (FRM) (Equipe DEQ20170336754). The work used the platforms          Submitted 2 October 2019
of the Grenoble Instruct-ERIC Centre (ISBG; UMS 3518 CNRS-CEA-UJA-EMBL) with support from        Accepted 9 January 2020
FRISBI (ANR-10-INSB-05-02) and GRAL (ANR-10-LABX-49-01) within the Grenoble Partnership          Published 1 April 2020
for Structural Biology. S.M. acknowledges funding from an EMBO long-term fellowship (ALTF        10.1126/sciadv.aaz7095
468-2014) and European Commission (EMBOCOFUND2012, GA-2012-600394) via Marie Curie
Action. The electron microscope facility was supported by the Rhône-Alpes Region, FRM, the       Citation: S. Guseva, S. Milles, M. R. Jensen, N. Salvi, J.-P. Kleman, D. Maurin, R. W. H. Ruigrok,
fonds FEDER, the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), the CEA, the University    M. Blackledge, Measles virus nucleo- and phosphoproteins form liquid-like phase-separated
of Grenoble, EMBL, and the GIS-Infrastructures en Biologie Sante et Agronomie. Author            compartments that promote nucleocapsid assembly. Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz7095 (2020).




                                                                                                                                                                                                      Downloaded from http://advances.sciencemag.org/ on April 16, 2020




Guseva et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaaz7095     1 April 2020                                                                                                                            11 of 11


                                                                                 3.3. Model N : P droplets

3.3    Model N : P droplets
    The experimental data reporting on protein ratios in condensed and dilute states (see article
Fig. 5) were further analysed. MeV N:P phase separation is an example of a heterotypic system
where protein-protein interactions play a key role. So, in this case, phase separation can be descri-
bed as a system of chemical equations where each equation characterises one of the interactions.
We assume that the NMR experiments were performed on samples which reached equilibrium, so
that thermodynamic equilibrium modelling can be applied. The analysis is based on an equilibrium
constant for predicting the composition of the system with the initial reagents and the products of
the reaction.
    Using the law of mass action, equilibrium concentrations (Ceq ) of the components can be
found from equilibrium constants (Kd ) and initial concentrations of the components (C0 , before
the reaction starts). A general idea of a dynamic approach to solve the equilibrium state can be
explained by a simple one-step model:
                                                        Kd
                                         a[A] + b[B]         [C]


                                     dx
                                         = k(A − ax)a (B − bx)b
                                     dt
                                           dx
                                              = k0 (C + x)
                                           dt
                                                         k0
                                  (A − ax)a (B − bx)b = (C + x)
                                                         k
                                                                                      0
where k and k’ are chemical rate constants for the forward and backward reactions, kk = Kd is an
equilibrium constant. x is an active mass, which is an infinitesimally small number at the equili-
brium. Starting from initial guess values for A0 , B0 and C0 = 0 concentrations, x can be found,
next new values for Ni , Pi and NPi can be calculated. For chemical reactions, concentrations of
mixed components are used as initial guess values. Recalculation of components concentrations
continues while x is higher than an accepted threshold value, then the system is assumed to reach
the equilibrium. The procedure is summarised in Algorithm 1.
     Experimental data measured by NMR provide information about N and P in solution (Fig.3.1a),
initial values of the components are also known (P is constant, 75 µM, N varied from 0 to 75 µM).
Using a dynamic approach explained just above, Kd can be found, however, the thermodynamic
model for fitting is necessary. We tested the following models and the corresponding systems of
equations:
     One-step model
                                                        Kd
                                          a[N] + [P]         [D]


                                      (N − ax)a (P − x)
                                                        = Kd
                                           D+x
N and P are protein concentrations in a dilute state, so observable by NMR, a is the stoichiometry
between proteins in the reaction, D represents concentration of the complex Na P.
   Two-step model
                                            Kd1                    Kd2
                                 a[N] + [P]       [D] + b[N]             [D2 ]

                                   ( (N−ax−by)a (P−x)
                                         D1 +x−y     = Kd1
                                               b
                                     (N−ax−by) (D1 +x−y)
                                            D2 +y        = Kd2


                                                   71


Chapitre 3. Measles Virus Nucleo- and Phosphoproteins form Liquid-like Phase-Separated
Compartments that Promote Nucleocapsid Assembly

Algorithm 1 How to find equilibrium concentrations
 1: Generate a model (aA + bB ↔ C)
                                               (A−ax)a (B−bx)b
 2: System of equations explaining the model (     (C+x)       = Kd )
 3: Solve equation and find x.
 4: for i in nattempts do
 5:     Random values for initial x (low=0, high=max(A,B))
 6:     Find x using modified Powell method
 7:     Check boundaries conditions:
 8:     if x then < 0
 9:          continue
10:     if A then < 0
11:          continue
12:     if B then < 0
13:          continue
14:     if C then < 0
15:          continue
16:     else
17:          break
18:     solution found
19: Update values
    (Aeq = A0 − x
    Beq = B0 − x
    Ceq = C0 + x)


This model comprises an additional step representing additional recruitment of N into the droplets
with stoichiometry of b, so that D2 corresponds to the complex Na+b P.
    Three-step model
                                    Kd1               Kd2               Kd3
                         a[N] + [P]       [D] + b[N]        [D2 ] + c[N]      [D3 ]


                                
                                  (N−ax−by−cz)a (P−x)
                                
                                
                                      D1 +x−y        = Kd1
                                  (N−ax−by−cz)b (D1 +x−y)
                                         D3 +y−z          = Kd2
                                 (N−ax−by−cz)c (D3 +y−z) = K
                                
                                
                                             D3 +z                 d3

This model comprises an more step explaining N transfer into the droplets with a third affinity
(Kd3 ) and stoichiometry (c), D3 corresponds to the complex Na+b+c P.
    It was obvious that the "one-step model" would not provide a good solution of the fitting,
as inspection of the data suggests that the stoichiometry between N0 and P0 is changing and this
cannot be explained by one first-order chemical reaction. The best fit to the "one-step model"
is presented in Fig. 3.1a. At low N0 : P0 ratio the fit follows experimental values, however at
higher N0 concentrations the ratio changes and both Neq and Peq concentrations in the solution are
overestimated.
    The two-step model includes an additional attraction of N into droplets, and as shown on
Fig.3.1b better explains the behaviour of the system. Fitted parameters are:

a = 1.16
b = 4.42
Kd1 = 10 µM


                                                     72


                                         3.4. Role of Ploop interaction with N in droplets dynamics

Kd2 = 100 µM

    During the first reaction N and P at 1:1 ratio are transferred into droplets, while during the
second, four additional N molecules are attracted. It should be mentioned that the Kd of the first
reaction is in the same range as the XD:Ntail affinity, and the second one is similar to Ploop :N
binding constant.




              (a)                             (b)                                   (c)

Figure 3.1 – Fitting of the thermodynamic models. (a) 1 step model, (b) 2 step model, (c) 3 step
model.

    Including the third step did not improve the fit and fitting parameters for the step 2 and 3 are
very similar:
a = 3.27
b = 1.37
c = 1.14
Kd1 = 50 µM
Kd2 = 200 µM
Kd3 = 200 µM

    We propose that two elementary reactions mostly control droplet formation. However, using a
thermodynamic description only a limited amount of reactions can be included. Also, spatial infor-
mation is ignored. Fluctuations in local concentration are proposed to be one of the mechanisms
of phase separation. Using molecular dynamics and statistical mechanics models, more complex
chemical reactions can be simulated. There are several statistical mechanics softwares available
for modeling phase separation which could be applied to describe N:P measles phase separating
system. This we plan to do and compare the results of different approaches.




3.4    Role of Ploop interaction with N in droplets dynamics
    As it was shown in section 3.2, inhibiting Ploop :N interaction did not suppress droplet forma-
tion. However, macrodynamic characteristics of droplets changed: FRAP was significantly slower
for the mutant in comparison with the wild type. We repeated the experiment using P50 N525 with
P304-507 VLK->AAA (Fig. 3.2 ) then added Ploop into the solution and surprisingly, the recovery
rate increased again. We propose that the Ploop :N weak interaction perturbs a stronger P:N in-
teraction and this makes the complex more dynamic and allows faster protein exchange between
phases.
    To better understand how exactly Ploop interacts with N and influences droplet dynamics, fur-
ther investigation is required. In particular, measurements of protein state in droplets could reveal


                                                    73


Chapitre 3. Measles Virus Nucleo- and Phosphoproteins form Liquid-like Phase-Separated
Compartments that Promote Nucleocapsid Assembly

roles of both interactions on the formation of phase separation.




Figure 3.2 – FRAP profile of fluorescently labelled P50 N525 in droplets formed with (red) P304-507 ,
(grey) P304-507 VLK->AAA, (black) P304-507 VLK->AAA and Ploop .




3.5    Interaction with importin α5
    Apart from N and P, droplets are known to accumulate other viral and cellular proteins (client
proteins). A review on proteins which were found in viral factories and their possible functions is
presented in section 1.4. Client proteins are attracted into droplets through interactions with the
scaffold or with other client proteins.
    Phosphoprotein is known to interact with multiple cellular factors via its disordered tail. Ploop
discussed above was not studied in detail previously. Recently, we found a new interaction which
involves Ploop and importin α, a cellular factor responsible for nuclear import. Importin α reco-
gnises a specific sequence on target proteins called nuclear localisation signal (NLS). The human
importin α family comprises at least seven isoforms, here we used importin α5 with a truncated
disordered domain which is responsible for importin β binding. Classical NLS are proposed to be
K-K/R-X-K/R, which is not present in Ploop , however, many exceptions are known in the literature
and the common feature for all the known examples is a cluster of basic amino acids.
    The intensity ratio profile presented on Fig. 3.3a shows a strong interaction between the C-
terminal half of the Ploop with the folded part of importin α5 as the intensity of the peaks decrease
due to the broadening. Four lysines spaced by four amino acids are present in the region where the
intensity drops which we assume to be responsible for the interaction with importin. Relaxation
profiles of Ploop alone and in the presence of importin on Fig. 3.3b show elevation in the N-terminal
part of Ploop suggesting additional interaction, which, appear to be weaker. Residues 411-412 are
lysines which could also bind to importin. As the intensity of the C-terminal half of Ploop dropped,
the information about relaxation rates for these residues is absent.
    Using fluorescently labeled importin we could show its accumulation into pre-existing droplets
formed with P304-507 and P50 N525 (Fig. 3.4a). In order to demonstrate some element of selectivity
for this protein, we used YFP as a control (Fig. 3.4b), it is excluded from the droplet.
    Importin α1 is know to be present in stress granules together with others nuclear transport pro-
teins. Their accumulation in SGs during stress conditions is proposed to inhibit nuclear transport. I
speculate that viral factories could absorb nuclear transport factors in order to sequester transcrip-
tion factors involved in immunity import into the nucleus. In addition, Ptail is known to interact
with STAT protein, which is itself a transcription factor, activating the cellular innate immune
system [66]. Whether it is attracted into droplets has yet to be tested.


                                                 74


                                                        3.6. N0 P chaperoned with the complete Ptail




                      (a)                                                    (b)

Figure 3.3 – Ploop interaction with importin α5. (a) Intensity ratio of peaks on an HSQC spectra
between Ploop and Ploop with importin α5 at 1:1 ratio (100 µM). (b) R1ρ profile of Ploop and Ploop
with importin α5 at 1:1 ratio (100 µM).




                      (a)                                                    (b)

Figure 3.4 – Fluorescence microscopy imaging of P50 N525 :P304-507 droplets with (a) importin α5-
FAM, (b) YFP. Fluorescent proteins were added into pre-formed droplets.


    The role of accumulation of importin into droplets was not studied yet and further investiga-
tions are required to characterize the interaction and how importin influences droplet behaviour.




3.6    N0 P chaperoned with the complete Ptail

     As it was shown in section 3.2 Fig.1, P304 N525 with P304-507 also triggers phase separation.
Such mixtures contain the full N and full P, truncated between Ptail and the tetramerization domain.
Ptail is known to interact with cellular proteins and, probably, can act as a hub, attracting client
proteins into droplets.
     While characterizing droplets formed with P304 N525 and P304-507 we could show that they
exhibit liquid behaviour: fuse, have spherical shape, and protein exchanges between phases. We
compared the assembly process between P50 N525 and P304 N525 and it appeared, that P304 N525
hardly assembles, either alone or in the presence of P304-507 (Fig. 3.5), at least using similar condi-
tions as for P50 N525 . P304 N405 was also tested for the ability to assemble and behaved similarly to


                                                  75


Chapitre 3. Measles Virus Nucleo- and Phosphoproteins form Liquid-like Phase-Separated
Compartments that Promote Nucleocapsid Assembly

P304 N525 .




Figure 3.5 – Kinetics of fluorescence anisotropy of RNA-FAM after addition of P50 N525 and
P304 N525 .

    In the introduction (section 1) interactions between Ptail and Ncore were discussed. There are
two interactions: P1-37 and P180-190 involved in chaperoning. The second interaction is placed on
the opposite side of Ncore , suggesting that Ptail wraps around Ncore , while remaining disordered.
Possibly, the region of Ptail between interacting sites shields the RNA binding surface, thus, inhi-
biting assembly process.
    How the full length complex of NP assembles in the cell is not clear, probably an additional
mechanism of regulation exists which controls the efficiency of N chaperoning by Ptail .




3.7     Conclusion
     P is known to be an essential co-factor for viral replication and was speculated to be involved
in the spatial organisation of the replication complex. Various models were proposed about how P
can bring L into a closer proximity to nucleocapsids. Also, N interaction with L and P was specula-
ted to be essential to encapsidate newly synthesised RNA, so it can be directly coated. In particular,
XD:Ntail interaction was thought to be involved in a cartweel model. Indeed, this interaction is es-
sential for droplet formation and thus vital for replication. The discovery of viral factories reveals a
physical mechanism whereby all the components can be concentrated and provides an explanation
for the the essential nature of P in viral transcription and replication processes.
     The ratio between N and P in droplets depends on a total concentration of protein in both
phases, which can possibly play role in regulation of protein concentration in cytoplasm. Indeed,
the transition from transcription to replication in many single-strand negative (and more recently
positive) sense RNA viruses has long been known to depend on the total concentration of the N
protein. This, allied with the known transcription gradient of N and P in MeV, suggests that the
formation of liquid droplets may represent, or simply control the previously unknown switch in
polymerase function. Similar effects were shown for ddx4 protein. The increase on total concen-
tration triggered the formation of more droplets, however, the concentration of a protein in the
rest of the cytoplasm was constant. In addition, the noise of protein concentration fluctuation was
significantly reduced in the presence of droplets [113]. To conclude, an additional role of viral
droplets could be the control of viral proteins concentration in the cytoplasm what can be used
to hide from cell-mediated immune responses, for instance. It was proposed that viral factories


                                                  76


                                                                                   3.7. Conclusion

can silence replication and transcription and reactivate after a prolonged period and cause another
round of replication and new virion production [56].
     Though Ptail was shown not to be sufficient for phase separation, it contains multiple binding
sites with other proteins and might act as a hub which attracted client proteins inside droplets
for instance STAT1/2. In case of STAT1/2 proteins, it was shown to inhibit alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-α/β ) and IFN-γ signaling [48, 77]. N is also known to interact with cellular proteins. What
is interesting is that binding site to the same cellular protein can be switched between N and P for
different viruses, for instance importin-binding nuclear localization sequence in rabies is present
of C-terminus of P [179], and for canine distemper virus and rinderpest virus are on N [187].
     Next, N protein assembly in the presence of Pfull has to be investigated, alone and in droplet.
Also, protein states and interactions inside droplets were not studied yet - requiring either opti-
misation of conditions for NMR or change of method for example, smFRET. Next, the effect of
L protein on phase separation is intriguing and the effect of condensation on a polymerisation
reaction and modulation of droplets in the presence of RNA (genomic or mRNA) are fascinating.




                                                77




                                                     Phosphorylation
                                                                          4
Measles N and P are both known to be phosphorylated. Here, in vi-
tro. description of Ptail phosphorylation is presented. New phospho-
rylation sites were identified and their kinetics were measured using
NMR (section 4.2). Next, the impact of phosphorylation on the as-
sembly was discovered and studied using NMR, fluorescence aniso-
tropy and negative stain microscopy (section 4.3). To understand the
mechanism how phosphorylation controls the assembly we studied
the effect of phosphorylation on Ptail backbone dynamics using NMR
relaxation (section 4.4). Finally, in section 4.5 N phosphorylation and
possible impact on nucleocapsid assembly is briefly discussed.



Some of this work was carried out by Sigrid Milles before and during
my thesis.




                                  79


Chapitre 4. Phosphorylation

4.1    Introduction
    Measles virus phosphoprotein received its name for the ability to be phosphorylated at multiple
sites. Two of them are known in the literature and are present on Ptail (S86 and S151) [43], [23]
several more were predicted.




Figure 4.1 – Regions of Ptail which are known or predicated to be phosphorylated. Acidic amino
acids are shown in red. ? indicates phosphorylation sites (S86 and S151) [43]. + indicates amino
acids predicted to be phosphorylated by CK2.

    These serines and threonines are phosphorylated by Casein Kinase 2 (CK2), a protein kinase
which recognises S/T-x-x-E/D sequence and phophorylates the first S/T residue. Acidic residues
(E/D) could be substituted with a phosphorylated residue, so the actual recognition site is S/T-x-x-
E/D/pX. Based on this, eight residues are predicted to be phosphorylated (Fig. 4.1), including those
known in the literature: T49, S86, S142, S151, T160, S180, T184 and S148 which is dependent
on S151 phosphorylation. All phosphorylated residues are surrounded by acidic residues, three of
them are predicted to appear in a highly negatively charged region that we have previously termed
the acidic loop of Ptail (Fig. 4.1).
    Although, several phosphorylation sites were proven to exist experimentally, the role of this
post-translational modification is unknown.




4.2    Ptail phosphorylation in vitro
    First, we tested whether Ptail can be phosphorylated in vitro. by CK2. Phosphorylation can be
studied by NMR. On an HSQC spectrum peaks which correspond to phosphorylated amino acids
have a specific chemical shifts and appear, in particular in the 1H dimension. On Fig.4.2 an overlap
of Ptail 1 H-15 N HSQC spectrum before and after phosphorylation is presented. One can notice five
new peaks appearing in the region between 1H 8.5 ppm and 9 ppm and several peaks disappearing
in the area which corresponds to the serine-threonine region (labelled on Fig.4.2). There are more
than five peaks which are affected by phosphorylation as not only the phosphorylated amino acids
change their chemical environment but also their neighbours. Changes in the position for some of
them are highlighted with arrows on an HSQC.
    New peaks were reassigned using 3D experiments as explained in Chapter 2. Phosphorylated
serines will be indicated by the name with "P" after the number, for example, S151P.
    Next, we studied kinetics of phosphorylation using NMR. For this, a series of SOFAST 1 H-
15 N HSQC spectra of P
                          tail were recorded during 36 hours after addition of CK2 and essential
components for phosphorylation (see Chapter 2). Each spectrum was recorded during 36 minutes.
Following the intensity of individual peaks allowed us to study the kinetics of phosphorylation
form the perspective of each amino acid individually. On Fig.4.10 a zoom into the region of 1 H-
15 N HSQC where phosphorylated amino acids appear is shown for several time points during the

phosphorylation. S151P peak appears first, then S86P and S148P start to appear. Phosphorylation


                                                80


                                                                  4.2. Ptail phosphorylation in vitro




Figure 4.2 – 1H-15 N HSQC spectra of Ptail non-phosphorylated (red) and phosphorylated (yellow).


of S148 influences S151P, two peaks corresponding to it (S151P and S151PP): One with non-
phosphorylated (S151P) and the other with phosphorylated S148 which also affects the chemical
shift of S151. S151P intensity increase initially, then, as it activated S148 phosphorylation, its
intensity is decreasing, while S151PP grows.




 Figure 4.3 – 1 H-15 N HSQC spectra of Ptail phosphorylated amino acids at different time points.

    On Fig.4.4 the profiles of intensity decrease for non-phophorylated serines and intensity growth
for phosphorylated ones are shown. Phosphorylation rates were extracted by global fit of appearing
and disappearing peak with single exponent except for S151.


                                                81


Chapitre 4. Phosphorylation




 Figure 4.4 – 1 H-15 N HSQC spectra of Ptail phosphorylated amino acids at different time points.




    To conclude, two phosphorylation sites which are known from in vivo studies are phospho-
rylated in vitro. In addition, we identify two new phosphorylation sites. Previously, three phos-
phorylation sites were identified using mutagenesis: S86, S151 and S180, the last had a minor
phosphorylation [43]. The mutation of S151 affects S148 phosphorylation which may explain
why this site was not previously found. S142 is slower than S151, S148 and S86 and could be
dependant on one of phosphorylation sites. This hypothesis can be tested by phosphorylation of
the S151A mutant.

    Even though mutation of S86 and S151 were shown to affect transcription [198] the role
of phosphorylation and the mechanism of regulation have not been previously reported and its
identification was one of the goals of the current research.

4.3    Assembly of P304 N525


    We investigated whether phosphorylation of P304 N525 can play a role in nucleocapsid assem-
bly. As shown in section 3.6, in the presence of Ptail bound to Ncore , assembly on RNA is extremely
inefficient, suggesting that Ptail interferes with the assembly process. We repeated the fluorescence
anisotropy experiment with RNA-FAM for P300 N525 which was phosphorylated with CK2 and then
purified from the kinase, ATP and MgCl2 , using gel filtration, so that all the compared samples
were in the same buffer condition.


                                                 82


                                                                          4.3. Assembly of P304 N525




Figure 4.5 – Kinetics of RNA-FAM fluorescence anisotropy for P50 N525 , P304 N525 , phosphorylated
P304 N525 and P304 N525 with a mutation of HELL motive.


    The assembly rate of phosphorylated construct is significantly higher, however still lower than
the one of P50 N525 (Fig. 4.5). In order to prove that anisotropy increases due to the assembly
process and not because of aggregation or any other process, we tested the sample with NS EM
(Fig. 4.6).




        Figure 4.6 – NS imaging of phosphorylated P304 N525 assembled with polyA RNA.

     It should be mentioned that P304 N525 with a mutated HELL motif, so that the second interac-
tion is inhibited, has an ability to assemble, but the efficiency is not high (Fig. 4.5).
     The mechanism how phosphorylation can control assembly and RNA binding is not clear. Ad-
ding phosphorous groups to serine adds negative charges to the chain and can influence electrosta-
tic interactions. As all phosphorylation sites are surrounded with acidic residues, phosphorylation
of these regions makes it even more acidic. In order to test whether strength of electrostatics along
Ptail can control nucleocapsid assembly we repeated fluoresence anisotropy of RNA at lower NaCl
concentration (75 mM instead of 150 mM).
     For all tested constructs the assembly was faster at lower salt, even for P50 N525 , probably, due
to the electrostatic nature of RNA:N interaction. P304 N525 was assembling at low salt even without
phosphorylation (Fig. 4.7). The rate of the assembly of the HELL mutant is higher than the one
of the wild type which indicates that not only the acidic loop controls the assembly but HELL
interaction is involved as well (Fig. 4.8).
     Using NS EM we confirmed nucleocapsid assembly for P304 N405 : At low salt and with phos-
phorylated Ptail (Fig. 4.9). No major difference was detected between these three samples, however
a more detailed analysis is required. NS microscopy of P304 N525 construct at different conditions
should be imaged as well.
     The kinetics of the assembly can be followed with NMR as was previously explained in Chap-
ter 1 which also provides information on how individual residues are involved in the nucleocapsid


                                                  83


Chapitre 4. Phosphorylation




              (a)                                     (b)                           (c)

Figure 4.7 – RNA-FAM fluorescence anisotropy kinetics comparison at law NaCl concentration
(75 mM)




Figure 4.8 – Kinetics of RNA-FAM fluorescence anisotropy for P304 N525 and P304 N525 HELL-
>AAA and low and high salt.




              (a)                                     (b)                           (c)

Figure 4.9 – NS microscopy of P304 N405 (a) at 75 mM NaCl, (b) phosphorylated at NaCl 150 mM,
(c) phosphorylated at NaCl 75 mM.




formation. First, we studied P304 N525 assembly at 75 mM NaCl without phosphorylation. HSQC
spectra before and after assembly are presented on Fig. 4.10. During the assembly, the intensity
of Ptail peaks increased, most effect was observed for residues 1-50 which were not detectable
before assembly, as shown on Fig. 4.11 (preassambled intensities (Pre) are shown with red line,
assembled intensities in yellow bars). This indicates that P1-50 releases from Ncore . The intensity
of HELL motif was not recovered after the assembly, probably it stays bound to the Ncore or in an
exchange with those particles which did not assemble. The kinetics of intensity change during the
assembly for several peaks are presented in Fig. 4.10 (b), and the distribution of extracted rates are
presented on Fig. 4.10 (c), showing the mean value to be around 0.7 h.


                                                 84


                                                      4.4. Coupled phosphorylation and assembly




Figure 4.10 – (a) HSQC spectra of P304 N525 before assembly (red) and after (yellow) at 75 mM
NaCl triggered with polyA RNA. (b) Kinetics of extracted peak intensities during the assembly.
They were fitted with exponentional curve. (c) Histogram distribution of assembly rates obtained
by fitting individual peak intensities kinetics.




           Figure 4.11 – Intensity of peaks of P304 before and after P304 N525 assembly.


4.4    Coupled phosphorylation and assembly
    Next, we studied the assembly of phosphorylated constructs. It should be mentioned that in
the presence of N (N405 or N525 ) phosphorylation is less efficient and S180 was not observed to be
phosphorylated (Fig. 4.12). S180 is in a close proximity to the HELL binding motif and is likely
less accessible to the kinase because of the interaction with Ncore .
    As the spectra of P304 N405 have fewer overlapped peaks (contains 125 fewer peaks), we used


                                                85


Chapitre 4. Phosphorylation




                      (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 4.12 – HSQC spectra of (a) P304 N525 phosphorylation and (b) P304 N405 in comparison with
P304 .




this construct to track simultaneous phosphorylation and nucleocapsid assembly. For this, RNA
and all the components essential for phosphorylation were added to the protein and transferred
into the NMR tube. CK2 kinase was added just before recording a series of HSQCs.


    The comparison of 0 point and the last recorded HSQCs (after 40 hours) are presented on
Fig. 4.13. Red arrows highlight phosphorylated peaks, black indicates P peaks which appear as
a result of the assembly. The kinetics of phosphorylated peaks are on Fig. 4.13. Ser180 was not
phosphorylated. The decay of non-phosphorylated peaks was fitted with a single exponentional
curve, Ser148 was not fitted with a single exponent as its phosphorylation is dependent on Ser151
phosphorylation.


    The assembly process was followed by the increase in the intensity of peaks which correspond
to P residues from 1 to 50 (Fig. 4.14). The extracted rates are in a range of 0.1 - 0.5 h-1 . The only
residue whose rate of phosphorylation is faster is S151, which suggests that assembly activation
is dependent only on the phosphorylation of S151. If phosphorylation is regulating assembly, as
appears to be the case, this suggests that the rate-limiting phosphorylation site is S151.


                                                 86


                                              4.5. Effect of phosphorylation on backbone dynamics




                                                                         (b)
                   (a)

Figure 4.13 – HSQC spectra of (a) P304 N525 phosphorylation and (b) P304 N405 in comparison with
P304 .




                   Figure 4.14 – Intensity of peaks of P304 during the assembly.


4.5    Effect of phosphorylation on backbone dynamics
      The effect of Ptail phosphorylation on the dynamics of the chain studied by measuring relaxa-
tion experiments: R1 , R1ρ and het-NOE. The comparison of relaxation rates between P304 before
and after phosphorylation are on the Fig. 4.15.
      Although, the overall dynamics of the chian are essentially identical, there are local differences
around the phosphorylation sites. Around Ser86 there is a slight elevation in R1ρ profile. The most
significant difference is around residues 140-150, not surprisingly as there are three phosphoryla-
tion sites. R1 , R1ρ and NOE values are increasing what indicates an influence on backbone dyna-
mics. In addition, the difference in NOE profile can be noticed for the region around the residue
190.
      Relaxation profiles of Ptail in the complex with N525 in a phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated
state were also compared (Fig. 4.16). Residues around phosphorylation sites Ser142, Ser148 and
Ser151 are elevated in the phosphorylated form which corresponds to the observation in the free
Ptail . We also measured P304 N525 relaxation at low salt conditions. The main difference between


                                                 87


Chapitre 4. Phosphorylation




Figure 4.15 – Relaxation profiles (a) R1 , (b) R1ρ and (c) het-NOE for Ptail with and without phos-
phorylation.




150 mM NaCl and 75 mM NaCl is in the region of acidic loop which also contains a triple phos-
phorylation site (Fig. 4.16). Analogous to phosphorylation at high salt, lowering salt concentration
elevates R1ρ values. However, in order to fully understand how charges influence Ptail dynamics
and control chaperoning, more experiments have to be acquired.




Figure 4.16 – Relaxation profiles (a) R1 , (b) R1ρ and (c) het-NOE for Ptail with and without phos-
phorylation.




                                                88


                                                                4.6. Nucleoprotein phosphorylation

4.6     Nucleoprotein phosphorylation
    There are two phosphoryaltion sites along Ntail which are known in the literature (S497 and
S510) and one in Ncore T279. The last one is known to be involved in nucleocapsid assembly and
is positioned close to the first binding site (P1-37 : under the kink between two helices (Fig. 4.18).




                   Figure 4.17 – NS imaging of Ncore T279E after TEV cleavage.




      Figure 4.18 – Structure of N0 P complex. T279 is shown in yellow, P in red, Ncore in blue.

    A phosphorylation mimic mutant T279E was produced to study the role of this phosphoryla-
tion site and it appeared that after TEV cleavage between P1-50 and Ncore this mutant is not stable
in a monomeric form. NS imaging show some oligomeric structures in which flexible and badly
ordered nucleocapsids may be present (Fig. 4.17).
    The kinase which phosphorylates this site is unknown, the epitope T-X-Y-X is present in
measles and Nipah could be a phosphorylation site on TTBK1. However, phosphorylation pre-
dictions propose high probability of non-specific phosphorylation including with CK2. In order to
exclude its phosphorylation with CK2 a control experiment has to be done. Otherwise, a T279A
mutant can be used to confirm the role of Ncore phosphorylation in assembly control.




4.7     Conclusion
    We confirmed Ptail phosphorylation with CK2 in vitro. and, in addition, identified new phos-
phorylation sites. Using NMR we followed phosphorylation kinetics of Ptail residues separately,
allowing us to distinguish the phosphorylation rates for each of them and determine the residue
which is phosphorylated first: S151.


                                                 89


Chapitre 4. Phosphorylation

    Previously, in cell studies show the effect of phosphorylation on viral transcription efficiency
(see Chapter 1, section 1.3.6). Here, we show that Ptail phosphorylation is required for the initia-
tion of the NC assembly in vitro. The phosphorylation sites are surrounded by acidic amino acids,
to which the phosphate group brings additional negative charge which, probably, modulates the
chaperoning strength. I speculate that phosphorylation weakens Ptail association with Ncore and
allows RNA binding that, in turn, triggers NC assembly. In order to understand the mechanism
of NC assembly regulation the complex should be studied and compared in phosphorylated and
non-phosphorylated forms. Using NMR we could not observe any signal coming from Ncore , pro-
bably, due to the big size and fast relaxation of this domain. How Ptail phosphorylation affects Ncore
should be studied by direct observation of Ncore . Methyl-transverse relaxation optimized spectro-
scopy (methyl-TROSY) is a NMR technique which allows to observe particles up to 1 MDa. We
plan to apply this technique to study phosphorylation effect on Ncore structure, dynamics and the
exposure of the RNA-binding site. In addition, we suggest to perform SAXS measurements to
examine long-range changes of the complex caused by phosphorylation.
    Finally, it should be mentioned that MeV phosphorylation also affects the nature of phase
separated viral factories [18]. Using in vitro formed droplets we plan to test the effect of Ptail
phosphorylation on the biophysical properties of N:P droplets and possibly link it with the NC
formation.




                                                 90




                                  Ntail dynamics in droplets
                                                                          5
In the current chapter I aim to compare the dynamics of an IDP in the
dilute and condensed phases. In order to achieve this I needed to first
identify a system that phase separates and gives high quality NMR
spectra in both phases. For this MeV Ntail was used. I start with a
classical characterisation of a liquid behaviour and determination of
a phase diagram which was fit with a mean-field Flory-Huggins mo-
del. Next, sample preparation for studying condensed Ntail by NMR
is explained. Protein secondary structure was compared in both states
and the protein was shown to remain disordered in the droplet. Next,
backbone dynamics using spin relaxation was studied in both states.
Using a model-free approach three time scale contributions to the
molecular motions were separated and compared between the dilute
and condensed phases. Finally, long-range conformational changes
are predicted using a modified flexible meccano approach. Calcu-
lated Ntail structures are more extended in a crowded environment,
although dihedral angle distribution do not change significantly bet-
ween two states.




                                  92


                                                                                    5.1. Introduction

5.1     Introduction

    Cellular biochemical reaction have been studied in vitro for decades and thousands of enzy-
matic reactions characterised in buffers designed to reproduce physiological conditions. However,
recent discoveries show that the environment in cell may differ from these, especially due to the
crowded conditions [78]. In addition, it appears that many biochemical reactions occur in mem-
braneless organelles where the concentration of the reagents can be several orders of magnitude
higher than the average concentration in cell [21]. Thus, understanding of biochemical reactions
in biologically relevant environment requires understanding of the impact of the droplet environ-
ment. This in turn requires protein characterisation in biocondensates which can differ from the
dilute state. IDPs are common members of condensates, and their functions are determined by
their dynamics, which is highly sensitive to the changes in the environment, especially viscosity.
Following the dynamics-to-function paradigm, the problem reduces to the understanding of how
protein dynamics changes in biocondensates and modulates protein function.
    Protein dynamics in supercrowded environment was studied previously for several proteins
[4]. However, such studies still remain exceptional. Protein backbone motions were shown to be
restricted (see below), however, a quantitative description and comparison with a dilute protein
state is required in order to understand the mechanisms of phase separation. Besides, while this
phenomenon is known for a long time in polymer physics field, the physics of it is not known.
Two main models are presented in the introduction. Working with proteins makes the study even
more complicated as bio-polymers are hetero-polymers and each amino acid type has a specific
reactivity. For now, most studies on phase separating proteins and nucleic acids suggest that inter-
actions between polymers are important (the review can be found in Chapter 1 as well). However,
there is no doubt that solvent plays an important role in phase separation and probably both po-
lymer and solvent contributions need to be taken into account. In addition, a gap between macro-
and micro-scale studies on phase separation exists. The roles of different factors in phase sepa-
ration are debated: protein dynamics, short-range structure and interactions, long-range structure
and interactions, protein:solvent interactions, protein diffusion.
    Solution NMR is a leading biophysical technique to study IDPs which provides an atomic re-
solution information. All processes mentioned above can be studied using NMR: protein structure
and dynamics, interactions with solvent and other proteins and even protein translational diffu-
sion. In particular, NMR provides a range of powerful techniques for the description of backbone
dynamics behavior in a wide range of time-scales from picoseconds to seconds.



5.1.1   Protein and solvent concentration in condensed phase

   Until now several studies were carried out on protein in the supercondensed phase. Below a
short review on protein concentration, structure and dynamics in droplets is presented.
     Protein concentration inside droplets was measured in several studies by different techniques
(UV-absorbance, FCS) and in all cases concentration was three orders of magnitude higher than
in a co-existing dilute phase. For LCD from hnRNPA1 protein concentration was estimated to be
30 mM, which corresponds to around 400 mg/ml [132]. For hnRNPA2 LCD protein concentra-
tion was slightly higher (440 mg/ml) [181]. Similar values were found for ddx4 (380 mg/ml) and
protein concentration dependency on NaCl in the buffer was shown: the increase of NaCl concen-
tration decreased protein concentration. Also, a phase diagram for ddx4 phase separation as a
function of NaCl and temperature was measured and fitted globally, which allowed to determine
protein density and calculate void volume, thus, solvent fraction as well, giving in this case is 0.75
(41.5 M H2 O) [21].


                                                 93


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets

5.1.2   Protein secondary structure comparison between dilute and condensed phases
    Most phase separating proteins exhibit a high content of disorder, some proteins are know to be
fully disordered in the dilute state (fus, ddx4, LCD of hnRNPA1). The role of charged and aromatic
residues in triggering phase separation was shown using NMR and mutagenesis. Nevertheless,
transient interactions between chains apparently do not affect the secondary structure and proteins
remain disordered in the condensed phase as was shown for ddx4 [21], hnRNPA2 [181] or fus
[26]. However, in the case of tau protein, β -hairpin-like conformations [9] or α-helix is formed
upon dimerization with TDP-43 in the droplet [38].

5.1.3   Protein conformational changes during the transition between phases
    It is a debated question whether an IDP becomes more extended in a crowded medium or rather
collapses. Even for the same protein (fus) contradictory data are available. Using PRE labelling
Monahan et al. showed that fus becomes more extended and has fewer intramolecular contacts in
a phosphorylated form or with phosphorylation mimicking mutation which are less prone to phase
separate [141]. On the other hand, using pyrene emission tau K18 was shown to exhibit more
extended conformations in the droplet which, as suggested, allows it to participate in a multitude
of intermolecular interactions to form a network [129].

5.1.4   Spin relaxation of proteins in condensed phase
     NMR relaxation is exquisitely sensitive to the dynamics of macromolecules occurring on ti-
mescales from picoseconds to tens of nanoseconds, and has been largely employed to study the
motion of IDPs, from the dilute state, to the study of interactions, through the effects of crowding
(see Chapter 2) to the impact of the cellular environment [72, 184]. While there are clear corre-
lations between measured relaxation rates and, for example, the formation of transient secondary
structure or interactions, it has not always been clear which motional modes are probed by the
different relaxation rates that are normally measured. Recent studies from our laboratory have em-
ployed multi-field relaxation measured as a function of temperature and crowding to shed more
light on this problem. This revealed that high field 15 N relaxation is sensitive to three components
of IDP dynamics: fast local libration (50 ps), intermediate backbone dihedral angle motion (1
ns) and slow segmental motions (10 ns) [2, 4]. The last are shown to be coupled to water dyna-
mics which probe local microviscosity [4]. Water content and viscosity change dramatically in a
biocondensate, and protein backbone dynamics is therefore probably affected as well.
     Comparison of R2 , R1 and hetNOE were used in several studies to explore how protein dyna-
mics change between phases.
     Slowed motion in the condensed phase was shown for hnRNPA2 [181]: A dramatic increase
in NOE (from -1 to 0.5) and R1 (from 0.75 to 1.5) and minor changes in R2 indicated that slow-
intermediate motions were affected more than fast ones.
     For fus a different tendency was shown: R2 values increase from 3 to 5 s-1 in the dispersed
state to 15 - 35 s-1 in the condensed phase, R1 values decrease from 1.3 to 1.7 s-1 to 0.75 to 1.2 s-1 ,
and heteronuclear NOE values do not change much (in condensed phase fluctuate around 0.5 s-1 ,
in dilute state between 0.2–0.6 s-1 ). In general, the changes in three relaxation experiments were
interpreted to report on protein restricted mobility in comparison with the dilute state. However,
only a qualitative analysis of protein dynamics is available [26].
     Spin relaxation of ddx4 was also measured in the dilute state (7 mg/ml), condensed state
which was formed by LLPS (380 mg/ml) and ddx4 mutant which does not phase separate but was
concentrated till 370 mg/ml and compared. The average R2 value for the dilute state was 4.3 s-1
which was significantly lower than both condensed phase samples. Surprisingly, even though pro-
tein concentration between phase separated and non-phase separated condensed samples does not
differ a lot, R2 values change from 9.8 s-1 (non-phase separating ddx4 mutant), to 16.4 s-1 (phase


                                                  94


                                                                              5.2. Open questions

separating ddx4). However, NOE values are higher for the non-phase separated sample. Using
these data a generalised order parameter for backbone amide (S2), and residue-specific overall
tumbling time, (τC ) were calculated using model-free approach (see methods). The average values
for S2/τC are presented on Fig. 5.1. The two points at highest concentration correspond to phase
separating samples at different NaCl concentrations, other three to non-phase separating samples.
S2 /τC has a step function between points corresponding to the non-phase separating and phase




Figure 5.1 – The dependency of S2τC on a protein concentration in the sample. Values are taken
from Table S1 [21]


separating measurements. All this suggests that apart from the effect of the viscosity and crow-
ding on protein dynamics an additional slowing of backbone motions in ddx4 is, potentially, the
result of transient intermolecular contacts that mediate phase separation [21]. However, this study
does not provide residue-specific information about how relaxation rates and dynamics change. In
addition, as mentioned above it was shown that model-free analysis of IDPs require three modes
at different timescales contributions, and here two were used.




5.2    Open questions

    It is clear from the preceding chapters that it is essential to understand the structural and
dynamic behaviour of component IDPs in liquid droplets if we are to understand the mechanisms
of stabilisation. In order to do this we need to understand the transformation of the free-energy
landscape when transitioning from the dilute to the condensed phase. Solution NMR is a leading
biophysical technique to study IDPs which provides atomic resolution information. In particular,
NMR provides a range of powerful techniques for the description of backbone dynamics behavior
in a wide range of time-scales from picoseconds to seconds. Important contributions have already
been made in this field and it is clear that recently developed approaches from our laboratory to
describe the properties of IDPs in solution as a function of physically meaningful dynamic modes
are well-adapted to examine this important paradigm (see section 2.3 and 2.4) [2, 4, 184].
    Until now, most studies on phase separating proteins and nucleic acids suggest that interac-
tions between polymers are important for stabilizing liquid droplets, however, there is no doubt
that solvent plays an important role in phase separation and probably both polymer and solvent
contributions have to be taken into account. In addition, a gap between macro- and micro-scale
studies on phase separation exists. The roles of different factors in phase separation are debated:


                                                95


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets

protein dynamics, short-range structure and interactions, long-range structure and interactions,
protein:solvent interactions, protein diffusion.
     In Chapter 3 we presented a study on measles N :P droplets. However, using NMR we could
not observe any signal coming from the protein in the condensed phase. There are several reasons
why this could happen. In order to investigate the dynamic properties at high resolution using
NMR relaxation, and to understand the limitations limit our ability to observe N:P droplets by
NMR we require a model phase separating system. This would allow us to test multiple conditions
and better understand what are the triggering factors for phase transition and how droplets are
stabilised.
     In this chapter I will show how we used the model recently developed in the lab to quan-
tify the three contributions to spin relaxation that are parameterised by the model-free approach,
with particular focus on the comparison between dilute, crowded and condensed phases. Using
an approach proposed recently (see Chapter 2, section 2.4) to predict relaxation rates in various
environments, it is intriguing to test it for the ability to predict protein dynamics in condensed
phase.
     Here we combine several biophysical techniques with the main accent on NMR to give a
detailed description of a model phase separating system and determine the changes which MeV
Ntail undergoes during the transition between the two states.




5.3     MeV Ntail as a model phase separating protein
5.3.1   Confirmation of Ntail droplet liquid behaviour
     As a model to study protein conformational and dynamic behaviour in the condensed phase
we used measles virus N from 405 to 525 aa (Ntail ) which phase separates after being mixed
with PEG 10’000 solution and forms a biphasic colloid solution. With time it evolves in a two
macro-phase solution: One rich in Ntail - yellow dense part and the second with a low Ntail concen-
tration (Fig.5.2(a)). Using fluorescent labelled Ntail we could image the colloid solution, as one
can see on Fig. 5.2(b) Ntail is concentrated inside droplets while the surrounding solution is not
fluorescent, indicating low Ntail content. Ntail is in exchange between both phases even after dro-
plets are stabilised as shown using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (Fig. 5.2(c)). Also
fusion events of two droplets with a subsequent relaxation into spherical particles were observed
indicating liquid nature of the condensed phase.


5.3.2   Indicating PEG content in both phases
    As phase separation was only observed in the presence of PEG we first studied its distribution
between phases using IR-spectroscopy as PEG gives a characteristic peak at 2978 cm-1 . The pre-
sence of PEG in the condensed phase was minor in comparison with protein and also lower then
the average concentration in the total volume, indicating that it is excluded from the condensed
phase. Fig. 5.3 shows the absorption in IR region for several concentrations of PEG, which were
used as references, condensed phase and dilute phases.
    In addition, on a 1D 1 H NMR spectra PEG peak gives a characteristic peak around 4 ppm. The
intensity of this peak measured on a condensed phase was much lower than in the buffer containing
75 mg/ml PEG, however, this could be due to faster relaxation of the molecule because of slower
dynamics or interactions (Fig. 5.4).
    To conclude, as PEG is mostly excluded from droplets, we consider that only Ntail is required
for phase separation and forms a self-scaffold, and PEG acts as a trigger, probably by replacing


                                                96


                                                                            5.4. Sequence analysis




Figure 5.2 – Ntail phase separation. (a) After incubation solution separates into two phases: Ntail
condensed and dilute ; (b) Fluorescent microscopy imaging of a colloid system where Ntail is la-
belled with FAM ; (c) FRAP of Ntail ; (d) Ntail amino acid sequence.



water and helping the system to reach a critical water volume fraction.


5.4     Sequence analysis

    A high proportion of glycine and prolines is typical for IDPs which tend to phase separate.
Ntail is also highly charged and around 10% of the sequence is represented by arginine residues.
Several examples of phase separating proteins with a high content of arginine are known, and in
some cases the replacement of arginines with lysines suppressed their ability to phase separate.
However, in contrast to a general observation for proteins which are prone to phase separate, low
aromatic amino acid content is present in Ntail (Fig. 5.2(d)). Only three aromatic residues are
present: 418Phe, 451Tyr, 517Tyr. The sequence could also not be described as low-complexity.


5.5     Phase diagram and protein concentration in droplets


5.5.1   Ntail phase diagram


    In order to measure the phase diagram we used the protocol described in [21]. Protein was
mixed with PEG 10’000 solution at various NaCl concentration, so that final Ntail was 300 µM and
PEG 200 mg/ml. PEG and protein solutions were gently mixed by pipetting until homogeneous
turbid solution was obtained. The condensed phase was sedimented down by incubating tubes
over night in PCR machine at given temperature and briefly sedimented at 11’000 rpm. Next,
we measured volumes of both phases and then measured protein concentration in the presence of
guanidinium chloride. The condensed phase was diluted 40 times before the measurement, dilute
phase twice. This procedure was performed at four temperatures (282 K, 288 K, 298 K, 308 K)


                                                97


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets




            Figure 5.3 – IR absorption spectra, condensed phase spectra are in black




 Figure 5.4 – 1H NMR spectra of (a) condensed solution, (b) in the presences of 75 mg/ml PEG.


and five NaCl concentrations (118 mM NaCl, 181 mM NaCl, 244 mM NaCl, 307 mM NaCl, 377
mM NaCl).
    Protein concentration was measured using nanodrop, three measurements for each sample
were recorded and averaged. Extinction coefficients ε = 2980M −1 cm−1 was calculated with Ex-
Pasy [216] and used to determine concentration from the absorbance at 280 nm. Calculated Ntail
concentrations as a function of salt and temperature are presented on Fig.5.5a in molar units and
5.5b in volume units. Error bars represent standard deviation of three measurements.
    Protein density of 1.35 g/cm3 [60] was used to calculate volume fraction φ of the protein in
both phases.
    As shown on Fig.5.5a and Fig.5.5b the phase diagram has an upper critical solution tempe-
rature, the highest protein concentration was estimated to be 38.9 mM what corresponds to 584
mg/ml at 288 K and 118 mM NaCl. Thus, 0.42 of volume fraction corresponds to solvent. Consi-
dering negligible presence of PEG, water concentration is estimated to be around 23.3 M at taken
experimental conditions.
    While salt concentration is increasing, the protein fraction in the condensed phase is decreasing
due to the lower protein concentration and, in addition, the volume of the condensed phase is
changing. Using fluorescence microscopy we could show that increasing of NaCl concentration


                                                 98


                                                      5.5. Phase diagram and protein concentration in droplets

       310                                     118 mM NaCl
                                                                         310                                 118 mM NaCl
                                               181 mM NaCl                                                   181 mM NaCl
       305                                     244 mM NaCl               305                                 244 mM NaCl
                                               307 mM NaCl                                                   307 mM NaCl
       300                                     377 mM NaCl               300                                 377 mM NaCl

       295                                                               295




                                                                  T, K
T, K




       290                                                               290
       285                                                               285
       280                                                               280
             0        10       20       30            40                       0.0    0.1     0.2     0.3        0.4
                              C, mM
                 (a) Concentration variation                                     (b) Volume fraction variation

Figure 5.5 – Ntail phase diagram as a dependency on temperature. Different colors correspond to
different salt concentrations.

progressively dissolve droplets (Fig. 5.6).




Figure 5.6 – Fluorescent microscopy images of Ntail droplets taken at different NaCl concentra-
tions.


5.5.2        Fitting Ntail phase diagram with Flory-Huggins model
    Using equation 2.7 we fit phase diagram at different NaCl concentrations (see Chapter 2,
section 2.5.3). We assumed that NNtail = 130 by the number of amino acids and Nsolvent = 1, the
results of the fit are plotted together with experimental data on Figure 5.7a. Critical composition
in this case is φc = 0.08, critical temperature points for each curve are summarized in Table 5.1
together with the fitted parameters A and B.
    χ was calculated using equation 2.4 and plotted in 5.7b, all have a positive value which cor-
responds to an attractive interaction promoting phase separation. Critical χ is lower than all expe-
rimentally obtained values in agreement with observations of phase separation in the solution.
    Equation 2.3 allows to estimate free energy of mixing and ∆Fmix /φ = kT χ(1 − φ ) is an ave-
rage interacting energy per one amino acid, the configurational entropic component of free energy
of mixing depends only on volume fraction
                                                        lnφ      1−φ
                                      Fmix /φ = kT          + kT     ln(1 − φ )
                                                        NA        φ
Values for both contributions together with the free energy of mixing are summarised in Table 5.2.
One can notice that they have opposite signs: The entropic part is negative, thus promoting mixing,


                                                             99


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets

Tableau 5.1 – Fitted parameters for each salt concentration and corresponding critical tempera-
ture.

                                      NaCl, mM        A          B            Tc , K
                                      118             -2.396     1005.484     336.960
                                      181             -2.994     1147.174     320.208
                                      244             -2.726     1060.044     319.850
                                      307             -3.242     1199.898     313.295
                                      377             -2.134     864.163      317.498


       350                                     118 mM NaCl
                                                                                                                 118 mM NaCl
       340                                     181 mM NaCl              1.1                                      181 mM NaCl
                                                                                                                 244 mM NaCl
                                               244 mM NaCl                                                       307 mM NaCl
       330                                     307 mM NaCl
                                               377 mM NaCl
                                                                        1.0                                      377 mM NaCl

       320                                                              0.9
T, K




       310
                                                                        0.8
       300
       290                                                              0.7
       280                                                                        285     290    295      300      305
             0.0   0.1      0.2   0.3       0.4      0.5                                         1/T, K
                                                                     (b) Calculated χ parameter for all temperature
       (a) Fitted phase diagram with equation 2.7.
                                                                     and salt conditions.

                              Figure 5.7 – The results of Flory-Huggins model fit.


interacting part is positive, thus promote demixing. The module of interacting contribution is hi-
gher in all presented cases and the total energy of mixing is positive, indicating phase separation.
In case of a pure Ntail solution (φ = 1) maximum restriction on the chain is achieved and the en-
tropy can be calculated as follows: ∆S = kT (0.562 kcal mol -1 , 0.572 kcal mol -1 , 0.592 kcal mol
-1 , 0.612 kcal mol -1 for used temperatures). Taken it together with mixing entropy, conformational

entropy of the mixture can be found (Table 5.3).

       Tableau 5.2 – Energy of mixing: entropic, interacting and total. Energies are in kcal mol-1.

                   283, K                           288, K                              298, K                        308, K
  NaCl, mM         ∆Hmix      ∆Smix     ∆Fmix       ∆Hmix       ∆Smix      ∆Fmix        ∆Hmix    ∆Smix    ∆Fmix       ∆Hmix    ∆Smix   ∆Fmix
  118              0.36       -0.23     0.13        0.37        -0.24      0.13         0.35     -0.25    0.10        0.35     -0.27   0.07
  181              0.35       -0.24     0.11        0.37        -0.25      0.11         0.35     -0.27    0.08        0.34     -0.29   0.04
  244              0.34       -0.24     0.10        0.35        -0.25      0.10         0.35     -0.28    0.08        0.33     -0.29   0.04
  307              0.35       -0.24     0.11        0.37        -0.26      0.11         0.33     -0.28    0.06        0.31     -0.30   0.01
  377              0.33       -0.25     0.09        0.35        -0.27      0.09         0.33     -0.28    0.05        0.33     -0.30   0.03


    Using a simple Flory-Huggins model we could already describe the behaviour of the system
via an average interaction parameter. Changes in free energy of mixing are dominated by interac-
ting energy over repulsive configurational entropic contributions. However, this approach does not
take into account possible differences in Ntail chain conformation and assumes that it is the same
in both phases.


                                                               100


                                                                           5.6. Free energy of mixing

    During the following sections we discuss how Ntail short- and long-range conformational ele-
ments change between dilute and condensed states as studied using NMR and molecular model-
ling.




5.6     Free energy of mixing
    The difference in free energy of the system during phase separation consists of two main
contributions: Energy of mixing and chain deformation. (As current research is focused on a pro-
tein characterisation, solvent contribution is ignored here).




                                       ∆G = ∆Gmix + ∆Gde f                                        (5.1)

    In a condensed phase the protein chains interact with each other, triggering phase transition
and, in order to maintain such interactions, adopt new conformations. In addition it may be that
packaging Ntail chains so densely can require some conformational adaptation. Ntail is represented
not as a single conformation but an ensemble, however, the characteristics of the ensemble in dilute
and condensed phase may differ significantly.


5.6.1   Sample preparation

    Protein state in the condensed phase was studied by NMR. The measurements were made on a
macroscopic droplet sample. Ntail and PEG were mixed, as described in Chapter 2, section 2.7, then
sedimented at 1000 rpm 20◦ C, around 80 µl of dense Ntail phase was obtained, and transferred into
a 3 mm Shigemi tube using glass capillary. Use of the Shigemi tube helped to achieve a better shim
during the NMR measurements and resulting in narrower peaks in 1 H dimension (Fig. 5.8(c)). The
comparison of 1 H-15 N HSQC spectra recorded in 3 mm Shigemi and normal tubes are presented
on (Fig.5.8). We used 10% 15 N-13 C labelled Ntail , and 90% of non-labelled Ntail .
    Almost all the peaks which are observed in dilute Ntail (300 µM) were present in droplet-
sample spectra (Fig. 5.8(b) apart from the region between 488-499 aa which correspond to a tran-
sient helix. The absence of this region could be due to a slow tumbling, as it was already more
rigid in the dilute state. Alternatively, this region could be involved in the interaction between Ntail
molecules what could be essential for phase separation.


5.6.2   Translational diffusion

    As in a droplet sample macromolecular concentration is much higher, and, thus, the solution is
more viscous, molecules diffusion is slowed down. Translational diffusion of Ntail was measured
using pulse field NMR experiment. Between the endoding and decoding gradients the molecules
were diffusing during 1 sec. A series of 1D 1 H with a varying z-gradient strength from 0 to 0.5 G/m
were recorded. Signal intensity is dependant on the gradient strength and diffusion: The faster the
molecule diffuses, the less magnetisation is recovered after the decoding gradient, the lower the
signal is. The maximum difference in the intensity is around 10% in the tested region of gradient
strength which confirms slow translational diffusion and a highly viscous state of droplet phase
(Fig.5.9).


                                                 101


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets




Figure 5.8 – 1 H-15 N HSQC spectra of Ntail recorded using 3 mm normal tube (a, red) and Shigemi
(b, cyan), Ntail spectra in a dilute state is shown in blue on both (a) and (b) ; (c) image of a Shigemi
tube with a droplet sample




Figure 5.9 – Integral of 1D 1 H spectra signal intensity of Ntail droplet sample as a function of
z-gradient strength.


5.6.3   Protein secondary structure propensity does not differ between dilute and
        condensed states
    Despite the advantages in spectral resolution which were obtained using Shigemi tube, still
Ntail peaks in the condensed phase are broadened especially in the 1 H dimension resulting in a
massive overlap in the 1 H-15 N HSQC spectrum as the central region is highly crowded. In addition,
some peaks are missing. Nevertheless, the HSQC spectra show a high level of similarity between
dilute and condensed phase Ntail , indicating that protein conformation should not differ a lot. We


                                                 102


                                       5.7. Ntail backbone dynamics is various crowded conditions

measured CO and Cα chemical shifts which are more sensitive to the difference in secondary
structure propensity. In addition, recorded 3D experiments also allowed to verify the assignment
of Ntail in droplet . The comparison of secondary Cα and CO together with N and NH chemical
shifts of the droplet sample with those recorded on a dilute Ntail are presented on (Fig. 5.10).
Apart from the missing helical region, minor differences are observed. To conclude, despite slow
translational diffusion (see FRAP and pulse field NMR measurements) most of the protein chain
remains intrinsically disordered.




Figure 5.10 – Secondary chemical shift (a) 1 H, (b) CO, (c) 15 N, (d) Cα. Black corresponds to Ntail
in dilute state, red to Ntail in condensed phase.

    Similar observations were made previously on other phase separating proteins: ddx4 and fus
also remain disordered even in droplet environment.




5.7     Ntail backbone dynamics is various crowded conditions
    Although we could confirm that protein structure is not changed as a result of the phase transi-
tion, the dynamic characteristics could be affected. IDPs features are determined by their motional
dynamics, which can be studied using NMR spin relaxation experiments.


5.7.1   Relaxation measurements on Ntail in a dilute state.
    In order to characterize Ntail dynamics a set of NMR experiments was measured: 15 N longitu-
dinal relaxation (R1 ), 15 N transverse relaxation (R2 ), which was measured using R1ρ experiment,
cross relaxation measured with 15 N-1 H NOE and CSA/dipole-dipole cross-correlated transverse
relaxation.
    Ntail samples (300 µM) were measured at two fields (600 and 850 MHz) and three PEG
concentrations (0, 37.5 mg/ml and 75 mg/ml). It should be mentioned that at these chosen ex-
perimental conditions Ntail still remained in a single phase even at 75 mg/ml PEG concentration.
The extracted relaxation rates are presented on Fig. 5.11.
    As expected, the percentage of crowding agent in solution is increasing, transverse relaxation
and NOE are increasing as well. The effect of a crowder present in the system on longitudinal


                                                103


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets




Figure 5.11 – Experimental relaxation rates of Ntail in a dilute state. Red plots correspond to
measurements at 600 MHz, blue - 850 MHz.


relaxation values is more subtle probably because at chosen experimental conditions relaxation
rates are close to the maximum R1 values.

5.7.2   Model-free analysis of Ntail in the dilute state
     Measured relaxation rates indicate significant backbone mobility along Ntail chain apart from
the short helical region between 488-499 amino acids where relaxation values are elevated and
show a higher rigidity. These data were used for model-free analysis to determine amplitudes and
timescales of motions (for a more detailed description see Chapter 2). For the simultanious fit of
all the data nanoviscosity of the samples was measured with longitudional water relaxation. The
extracted values are shown in Fig. 5.12 and were used for Ntail analysis.

                         1.0       R1, water = 0.289 s 1 PEG 0 ml/ml
                                   R1, water = 0.335 s 1 PEG 37 mg/m
                         0.8       R1, water = 0.365 s 1 PEG 75 mg/ml

                         0.6
                         0.4
                         0.2
                         0.0
                          10   1                     100                101
                                                  time, sec
Figure 5.12 – Water relaxation rates in the presance of 0, 37.5 mg/ml and 75 mg/ml PEG and 300
µM Ntail .

   Extracted order parameters and correlation times are shown on Fig. 5.13, 5.14.
   As was described in Chapter 2, the correlation time of the fast motion generally varies very
weakly along the sequence with similar conformational properties, and was fixed to previously


                                                    104


                                      5.7. Ntail backbone dynamics is various crowded conditions

optimized values of 45 ps along the disordered region and 0 for the helical region. Fitted interme-
diate motions are in the range of 0.8-1.6 ns, slow are in the range of 4 to 15 ns. The distribution
of amplitudes of the different components of the motion, their correlation times and the friction
coefficients of each amino acid fall in very similar ranges compared to those of Ntail from Sendai
virus and the disordered domain of MKK4 that were published recently [4].




Figure 5.13 – Extracted parameters of backbone motions. (a) Intermediate correlation times, (b)
slow correlation times, (c) amplitudes of motions for all three correlation times.




                    Figure 5.14 – Fits of experimental spin relaxation values.



5.7.3   Relaxation measurements on Ntail in a condensed state
    A similar set of experiments of a droplet sample where protein concentration was estimated
around 28 mM was measured. Ntail in a dilute sample was 300 µM. Relaxation rates in the droplet
sample are plotted together with a dilute samples measurements (Fig. 5.15) to represent the effect
of a supercrowded condition on a spin relaxation. First, as it was mentioned above, the helical


                                               105


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets

region (residues between 488 and 499) was not observed in the spectrum, so relaxation values
for these residues are absent. R2 in the disordered regions increased from 2-4 s−1 in the dilute
state to 10-20 s−1 in the droplet. Similarly, transverse cross-correlated relaxation rates increased
from 1-3 s−1 to 4-11 s−1 . R1 values are reduced in the crowded condition and at 850 MHz drop
by 0.4 s−1 . NOE values increased by 0.3-0.4. One could also notice that the profile (local peaks
and depressions) are surprisingly well conserved between the dilute and the condensed states.
In general, with an increase of sample viscosity as a result of an increase of PEG or protein
concentration, backbone motions appear to be effected at all timescales. In the droplet sample
backbone motions seems to be changed, but in order to understand which timescales are mostly
affected, a model-free analysis has to be performed.




Figure 5.15 – Experimental relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state. Red plots correspond to
measurements of dilute Ntail at 600 MHz, blue - dilute Ntail at 850 MHz, black-grey to condenced
dilute Ntail .

    Water relaxation was again measured in the droplet, in an attempt to measure the nanovisco-
sity of the system and to relate this to dynamic correlation times as in the case of the crowded
and in cellulo investigations. In order to faithfully interpret the water R1 in terms of a rotational
correlation time, it is essential that exchange terms do not contribute to the measurement. This can
be tested by measuring the water relaxation as a function of magnetic field strength. In MeV Ntail
droplets studied here the water relaxation shows a clear and strong field dependence, precluding
continuation of this line of investigation. It is possible that relaxometry measurements may clarify
the origin of the field dependent contribution and this may be an avenue worth exploring. Despite
not being able to link solvent viscosity in dilute, crowded and condensed phases any further, we
can still compare the dynamic behaviour of the protein in the different conditions.

5.7.4   Model free analysis of Ntail in a condensed state and comparison with a dilute
        state.
     Relaxation data measured on condensed Ntail were fitted alone using the model-free approach.
In this case four parameters were fitted, the results of the fit are plotted on Fig. 5.16.
     As previously for the dilute phase, the fast correlation time was optimised for the entire mo-
lecule. In this case the optimal value was in the range of 100 ps, significantly slower than in the
absence of phase separation. In the case of the condensed phase, it was noted that η xy and R2 gave
slightly different distributions of J(0). We therefore removed R2 from the fit and back-calculated
it. By subtracting this back-calculated value from the experimental value, we could estimate the
contribution from exchange to R2 . Interestingly, this value is quantitatively very similar at both


                                                106


                                       5.7. Ntail backbone dynamics is various crowded conditions




                Figure 5.16 – Fitted relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state.


magnetic fields: 600 and 850 MHz, strongly suggesting that this is a contribution from slow ex-
change, reporting on the association rate of an interaction, possibly the stabilizing interaction for
the formation of liquid-liquid phase separation. The contribution is localized in the N-terminal
region of Ntail , although of course we cannot rule out such a contribution in the helical region, as
we do not have relaxation measurements in this region in the condensed phase. Extracted order pa-
rameters and site specific intermediate and slow correlation times of motion of the droplet sample
are presented together with the values obtained for dilute samples Fig. 5.17.




                Figure 5.17 – Fitted relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state.

    Correlation times of slow motions (τs ) increase by around 15 ns along the Ntail sequence, while
correlation times of intermediate backbone motions (τi ) are about 40% slower in general with local
increases that are much more significant, around residues 420, 451, 517 and close to the helical
region. Surprisingly, the only three aromatic residues Ntail contains are Phe418, Tyr451, Tyr517,
in addition His421. Why intermediate motions are more affected around aromatic residues still
has to be studied, but one could speculate that these residues could be involved into a inter-chain
contacts which organise droplet network.


                                                107


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets

    The amplitudes of the three contributions to the motions of Ntail backbone also change signifi-
cantly between the dilute and the condensed states. While the fast motions are slowed down, their
amplitude is quenched by a factor of about two. The contribution of the intermediate motion also
decreases from approximately 0.6 to 0.4. As a consequence, the remainder of the correlation func-
tion is accounted for by the slow motional component, which is much bigger: it increases from the
average value of 0.1 to 0.5. To conclude, in condense phase the contribution of the slow motion
mode in protein dynamics is much higher and the amplitudes of fast and intermediate motions
decrease. Some similarity can be noticed on Fig. 5.13 for the helical region: the only region along
Ntail sequence where the amplitudes for slow motions are higher then for other two. Taking into
account that the secondary structure of Ntail does not change during the transition between phases,
we speculate that such an effect on the protein dynamics can be caused by the intermolecular
interactions between protein chains. Multiple Ntail molecules form a network which keeps them
together and stabilises the condensed phase.
    This is one of the first quantitative, site-specific comparison of motional amplitudes and times-
cales between IDPs in condensed and non-condensed phases and it will be interesting to compare
these results with molecular simulation to provide more insight into the physical origin of these
changes.




5.8    Long-range conformational changes
     Short-range structure of Ntail was shown to be the same in both states: dilute and condense.
However, Ntail could still experience long-range chain deformation during the transition between
dilute and condensed states. This could also contribute to the entropy and the total free energy of
the system.
     In order to study long-range conformational changes we generated an in silico Ntail droplet
using flexible-meccano, an approach which was developed for an explicit ensemble description of
IDPs. This algorithm samples backbone dihedral angles to generate protein chains according to a
random coil model. A Boltzmann distribution of dihedral angles is derived from non-structured
elements in a database of structures determined by X-ray crystallography. While the chain is ge-
nerated it follows a self-avoiding walk. In order to generate a supercondensed phase we added
additional restriction to the algorithm to avoid all previously generated chains as well. Each next
chain was started to be generated with a shift in the xyz coordinates, so that starting points form a
lattice in the virtual box.
     Ntail box generation:
1. Generate self avoiding chain using flexible-meccano.
2. Add side chains using pulchra.
3. Protonate a chain using reduce (3.23).
4. Add new atoms to avoid list.
5. Shift starting point for generating the next chain.

    We generated an ensemble of single Ntail chains, which represents an infinite dilution case and
three boxes which represent condensed phase at different positions on phase diagram and has 16,
27 and 40 mM Ntail concentration. An example of 40 mM Ntail box is present on Fig. 5.18.
    First, dihedral angles of generated ensembles were compared and we could not find any
concentration dependant differences in dihedral angles distribution (Fig. 5.19).
    This indicates that despite the tight packing of the protein chain backbone dihedral angles
can sample the same Boltzmann distribution as in the dilute case. However, possible attractive
interactions between chains are not taken into account here.


                                                108


                                                                                   5.9. Conclusions




                Figure 5.18 – Fitted relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state.




            Figure 5.19 – Ramachandran plots for (a) dilute, (b) 40 mM Ntail boxes.


     Next, we compared the long-range characteristics of the chain: Rg and end-to-end distances. Rg
is increasing with concentration from 31 nm to 39 nm. The effect on end-to-end distance is even
more noticeable: It is increasing from 108 nm to 149.6 nm. Distributions of Rg and end-to-end
distances are presented on Fig 5.20. I should state that we have no experimental data that confirms
this extension of the chain.




5.9    Conclusions
     In this Chapter a new phase separating model system is characterised. We first show the proves
of its liquid behaviour and perform a routine analysis of the phase diagram using Flory-Huggins
model.
     Protein structure in the condensed phase is shown to be the same as in the dilute state in
terms of local backbone sampling over the ensemble of states, however, information about the
helical region is missing. This strongly suggests that the populations of different conformations
are essentially maintained.
     We continued with the characterisation of protein dynamics in condensed phase. All the mo-


                                                109


Chapitre 5. Ntail dynamics in droplets




Figure 5.20 – The comparison of long-range characteristics. (right) Rg , (left) end-to-end distance
for Ntail dilute (grey) and 40 mM box (blue).


tional modes are shown to be slower in the droplet sample and what is intriguing is that the ampli-
tudes of motions change and show increased contributions of the slow mode. This means that Ntail
spectral density function does not just shifts but changes the entire shape. Combination of these
experimental data with molecular simulation studies may help understand how protein dynamics
are affected by phase separation.
    The are several indications of intermolecular interactions between Ntail chains in the conden-
sed phase: slowed dynamics, particular regions are more affected then others, an additional contri-
bution to R2 relaxation rates. Direct observations of such contacts are required in order to first
identify them and evaluate the importance. For this NMR and mutagenesis can be combined.
    Long-range structural changes are predicted with molecular modelling, however, experimental
data are necessary to confirm the computational predictions. We plan to test them using SAXS and
PRE measurments.
    Finally, solvent in condensed phase is poorly studied and requires new approaches to be deve-
loped to characterise its concentration, translational and rotational diffusion, exchange with pro-
tein.




                                               110




Deuxième partie

SARS-CoV2




      112


                                                       SARS-CoV-2
                                                                      6
In this chapter preliminary results on SARS-COV-2 Nucleoprotein
are presented. They were obtained after the SARS-COV-2 pandemic
started both in the context of the covid19-nmr consortium and as an
independent project in our laboratory.




                               113


Chapitre 6. SARS-CoV-2

6.1     Introduction to the SARS-CoV-2
    The ongoing coronoviral pandemic is caused by a Severe acute respiratory syndrome coro-
navirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) which is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus corresponding to
the family Coronaviridae, order Nidovirales. Its genome, similarly to negative-sense RNA viruses,
which were discussed in the previous chapters, is associated with the nucleoprotein (N). However,
structure and probably some functions differ.


6.1.1   SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein
    SARS-CoV-2 N is known to be an important cofactor of the viral replication complex, interac-
ting and protecting the viral genome from the host cell environment, and regulating viral mRNA
transcription and also involved in virus budding and envelope formation.
    The structure of N is illustrated on Fig. 6.1.




Figure 6.1 – Structure of SARS-CoV-2 N protein. (a) Domain architecture of the SARS-CoV-2 N
protein. Two folded domains: RNA binding domain and dimerization domain. And three disorde-
red: N-terminal domain (NTD), link and C-terminal domain (CTD). (b) Structure of the SARS-
CoV-2 RNA binding domain (PBD: 6YI3). Center and left: coloured based on surface potential.
Right: ribbon structure with N- and C-termini highlighted with spheres. (c) Dimer structure of the
SARS-CoV-2 dimerization domain (PDB: 6YUN). Center and left: coloured based on surface po-
tential. Right: ribbon structure, yellow and purple for separate monomers, with N- and C-termini
highlighted with spheres.


                                               114


                                                                                        6.2. Results

     N is a highly dynamic protein, comprising five domains, three of which are predicted to be
intrinsically disordered. The structural features of coronaviral N are strongly conserved, with 90%
sequence identity between SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2. The structural domains: RNA-binding
domain and dimerisation domain, are solved by X-ray crystallography (Fig. 6.1).
     The central linker domain comprises a serine-arginine (SR) rich domain that is predicted to be
phosphorylated at multiple sites, the impact of this modification in the structure of N is unknown.
     N of SARS-CoV-1 was studied by NMR, N-terminal folded domain (RNA-binding domain)
has been investigated in isolation using NMR spectroscopy [49]. The disordered domains (1, 3 and
5 on Fig. 6.1) have so far not been investigated at a residue specific level, although recent studies
used single molecule FRET and molecular modelling propose the existence of transient helices in
domains 1 and 3 [40]. A recent study also investigated the conformational behaviour of a 15 amino
acid peptide representing the SR region of domain 3 in its phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated
forms [188].

6.1.2   SARS-CoV-2 liquid-liquid phase separation
     LLPS of SARS-CoV-2 N upon mixing with RNA was shown recently in several parallel stu-
dies. Phosphorylation of the central linker domain modulates the liquid nature of the droplets. The
molecular basis of the stabilization of this phenomenon remains unknown in the case of SARS-
CoV-2.
     Recently, it has been shown that full length N protein undergoes liquid-liquid phase sepa-
ration upon binding long RNA (more than 300 nucleotides), that phosphorylation impacts this
process by affecting the liquid-like nature of the droplet, and that the viral polymerase colocalizes
to these membraneless organelles [98] ; [158] ; [40] ; [188] [28]. LLPS upon interaction with RNA
was found to be sequence specific, an observation that may be related to the sequence-dependent
encapsidation observed for MeV N:RNA [136]. LLPS was also found to span physiologically rele-
vant temperature ranges [98]. Interestingly, a recent investigation of the interactome of Sars-CoV-2
found that N interacts with G3BP1/2 [76], a known component of granules that store mRNA in
response to stress [223]. A recent investigation of N:RNA condensates revealed that N coloca-
lizes to G3BP1/2 stress granules [188]. Finally it has recently been shown that Sars-CoV-2 RNA-
dependent RNA-polymerase localizes to N:RNA droplets, supporting the suggestion that the virus
exploits condensation to enhance genome replication. It is not yet known which interactions are
responsible for LLPS in Sars-CoV-2 and the process is not yet understood at atomic resolution.




6.2     Results
    We optimised expression and purification of SARS-COV-2 nucleoprotein. Based on the pre-
dictions of structural propensity, we subdivided N into five domains: N1 , N2 , N3 , N4 and N5 . The
following consctructs were designed: N12 , N3 , N45 , N123 , Nfull . Expression and purification were
optimised.
    The results are presented in the article in Annexe 2.
    Next, NMR signal assignment of N3 backbone was performed. For this 3D experiments HNCO,
HNCACO, HNCA and HNCOCA were recorded and the assignment was done manually.
    The results are presented in the article in Annexe 3.
    Finally, we optimized expression and purification of full length N and tested conditions for its
in vitro phase separation. Surprisingly, we could observe phase separation without adding RNA
(Fig. 6.2). Either N indeed can phase separate on its own and in the presence of RNA the process
is enhanced, or during the purification RNA from E. coli remains in the sample.


                                                115


Chapitre 6. SARS-CoV-2




                       Figure 6.2 – DIC microscopy of SARS-COV-2 N.


6.3    Conclusions
   Taking into account the importance of the SARS-CoV-2 study, we plan to continue SARS-
CoV-2 N characterisation with a main focus on its behaviour in liquid-liquid phase separation.




                                             116




                                                                       Bibliographie

 1.   A BDELLA, R., AGGARWAL, M., O KURA, T., L AMB, R. A. & H E, Y. Structure of a pa-
      ramyxovirus polymerase complex reveals a unique methyltransferase-CTD conformation.
      Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 117,
      4931-4941. ISSN : 10916490 (2020).
 2.   A BYZOV, A., S ALVI, N., S CHNEIDER, R., M AURIN, D., RUIGROK, R. W. H., J ENSEN,
      M. R. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Identification of Dynamic Modes in an Intrinsically Disor-
      dered Protein Using Temperature-Dependent NMR Relaxation. Journal of the American
      Chemical Society 138, 6240-6251. ISSN : 0002-7863. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 /
      jacs.6b02424 (2016).
 3.   ACKERMANN, B. E. & D EBELOUCHINA, G. T. Heterochromatin Protein HP1 Gelation
      Dynamics Revealed by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy. Angewandte Chemie International
      Edition 58, 6300-6305. eprint : https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.
      1002/anie.201901141. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
      anie.201901141 (2019).
 4.   A DAMSKI, W., S ALVI, N., M AURIN, D., M AGNAT, J., M ILLES, S., J ENSEN, M. R., A BYZOV,
      A., M OREAU, C. J. & B LACKLEDGE, M. A Unified Description of Intrinsically Disordered
      Protein Dynamics under Physiological Conditions Using NMR Spectroscopy. Journal of
      the American Chemical Society 141, 17817-17829. ISSN : 0002-7863. https://doi.org/
      10.1021/jacs.9b09002 (2019).
 5.   A LBERTI, S. The wisdom of crowds : Regulating cell function through condensed states of
      living matter. Journal of Cell Science 130, 2789-2796. ISSN : 14779137 (2017).
 6.   A LBERTI, S., G LADFELTER, A. & M ITTAG, T. Considerations and Challenges in Studying
      Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation and Biomolecular Condensates. eng. Cell 176, 419-434.
      ISSN : 1097-4172. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30682370%20https://www.
      ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6445271/ (2019).
 7.   A LBERTI, S., S AHA, S., W OODRUFF, J. B., F RANZMANN, T. M., WANG, J. & H YMAN,
      A. A. A User ’ s Guide for Phase Separation Assays with Purified Proteins. Journal of
      Molecular Biology 430, 4806-4820. ISSN : 0022-2836. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
      jmb.2018.06.038 (2018).
 8.   A MARASINGHE, G. K. et al. Taxonomy of the order Mononegavirales : update 2019. eng.
      Archives of virology 164, 1967-1980. ISSN : 1432-8798 (Electronic) (2019).
 9.   A MBADIPUDI, S., R EDDY, J. G., B IERNAT, J., M ANDELKOW, E. & Z WECKSTETTER, M.
      Residue-specific identification of phase separation hot spots of Alzheimer’s-related protein
      tau. Chem. Sci. 10, 6503-6507. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C9SC00531E (26 2019).
10.   A NDREI, M. A., I NGELFINGER, D., H EINTZMANN, R., ACHSEL, T., R IVERA -P OMAR, R.
      & L ÜHRMANN, R. A role for eIF4E and eIF4E-transporter in targeting mRNPs to mamma-
      lian processing bodies. eng. RNA (New York, N.Y.) 11, 717-727. ISSN : 1355-8382 (Print)
      (2005).
11.   A NTHIS, N. J. & C LORE, G. M. Visualizing transient dark states by NMR spectroscopy.
      Quarterly Reviews of Biophysics 48, 35-116. ISSN : 14698994 (2015).


                                              118


                                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHIE

12.   B ERNADÓ, P. & B LACKLEDGE, M. A self-consistent description of the conformational be-
      havior of chemically denatured proteins from NMR and small angle scattering. Biophysical
      Journal 97, 2839-2845. ISSN : 15420086. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2009.
      08.044 (2009).
13.   B ERNADÓ, P. & B LACKLEDGE, M. A self-consistent description of the conformational be-
      havior of chemically denatured proteins from NMR and small angle scattering. Biophysical
      Journal 97, 2839-2845. ISSN : 15420086. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2009.
      08.044 (2009).
14.   B ERRY, J., W EBER, S. C., VAIDYA, N., H AATAJA, M. & B RANGWYNNE, C. P. RNA trans-
      cription modulates phase transition-driven nuclear body assembly. Proceedings of the Na-
      tional Academy of Sciences 112, E5237-E5245. ISSN : 0027-8424. eprint : https://www.
      pnas.org/content/112/38/E5237.full.pdf. https://www.pnas.org/content/
      112/38/E5237 (2015).
15.   B LOYET, L. M., B RUNEL, J., D OSNON, M., H AMON, V., E RALES, J., G RUET, A., L AZERT,
      C., B IGNON, C., ROCHE, P., L ONGHI, S. & G ERLIER, D. Modulation of Re-initiation
      of Measles Virus Transcription at Intergenic Regions by PXDto NTAILBinding Strength.
      PLoS Pathogens 12, 1-39. ISSN : 15537374 (2016).
16.   B LOYET, L.-M., M ORIN, B., B RUSIC, V., G ARDNER, E., ROSS, R. A., VADAKKAN, T.,
      K IRCHHAUSEN, T. & W HELAN, S. P. J. Oligomerization of the Vesicular Stomatitis Vi-
      rus Phosphoprotein Is Dispensable for mRNA Synthesis but Facilitates RNA Replication.
      Journal of Virology 94, 1-12. ISSN : 0022-538X (2020).
17.   B OEYNAEMS, S., B OGAERT, E., KOVACS, D., KONIJNENBERG, A., T IMMERMAN, E.,
      VOLKOV, A., G UHAROY, M., D E D ECKER, M., JASPERS, T., RYAN, V. H., JANKE, A. M.,
      BAATSEN, P., V ERCRUYSSE, T., KOLAITIS, R. M., DAELEMANS, D., TAYLOR, J. P., K EDERSHA,
      N., A NDERSON, P., I MPENS, F., S OBOTT, F., S CHYMKOWITZ, J., ROUSSEAU, F., FAWZI,
      N. L., ROBBERECHT, W., VAN DAMME, P., T OMPA, P. & VAN D EN B OSCH, L. Phase Se-
      paration of C9orf72 Dipeptide Repeats Perturbs Stress Granule Dynamics. Molecular Cell
      65, 1044-1055.e5. ISSN : 10974164. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.
      02.013 (2017).
18.   B OKE, E., RUER, M., W ÜHR, M., C OUGHLIN, M., L EMAITRE, R., G YGI, S. P., A LBERTI,
      S., D RECHSEL, D., H YMAN, A. A. & M ITCHISON, T. J. Amyloid-like Self-Assembly of
      a Cellular Compartment. Cell 166, 637-650. ISSN : 0092-8674. https://doi.org/10.
      1016/j.cell.2016.06.051 (2016).
19.   B ORCHERDS, W., B REMER, A., B ORGIA, M. B. & M ITTAG, T. How do intrinsically di-
      sordered protein regions encode a driving force for liquid-liquid phase separation ? arXiv :
      2008.02917 [q-bio.BM] (2020).
20.   B OUVIGNIES, G., B ERNADÓ, P., M EIER, S., C HO, K., G RZESIEK, S., B RÜSCHWEILER,
      R. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Identification of slow correlated motions in proteins using resi-
      dual dipolar and hydrogen-bond scalar couplings. Proceedings of the National Academy of
      Sciences of the United States of America 102, 13885-13890. ISSN : 00278424 (2005).
21.   B RADY, J. P., FARBER, P. J., S EKHAR, A., L IN, Y.-H., H UANG, R., BAH, A., N OTT, T. J.,
      C HAN, H. S., BALDWIN, A. J., F ORMAN -K AY, J. D. & K AY, L. E. Structural and hydro-
      dynamic properties of an intrinsically disordered region of a germ cell-specific protein on
      phase separation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, E8194-E8203.
      ISSN : 0027-8424. eprint : https://www.pnas.org/content/114/39/E8194.full.
      pdf. https://www.pnas.org/content/114/39/E8194 (2017).




                                              119


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

22.   B ROWN, C. J., J OHNSON, A. K. & DAUGHDRILL, G. W. Comparing Models of Evolution
      for Ordered and Disordered Proteins. Molecular Biology and Evolution 27, 609-621. ISSN :
      07374038 (2010).
23.   B RUHN, J. F., H OTARD, A. L., S PIROPOULOU, C. F., L O, M. K. & S APHIRE, E. O. A
      Conserved Basic Patch and Central Kink in the Nipah Virus Phosphoprotein Multimeriza-
      tion Domain Are Essential for Polymerase Function. Structure 27, 1-9 (2019).
24.   B RUTSCHER, B., F ELLI, I. C., G IL -C ABALLERO, S., H OŠEK, T., K ÜMMERLE, R., P IAI,
      A., P IERATTELLI, R. & S ÓLYOM, Z. NMR Methods for the Study of Instrinsically Di-
      sordered Proteins Structure, Dynamics, and Interactions : General Overview and Practical
      Guidelines. eng. Advances in experimental medicine and biology 870, 49-122. ISSN : 0065-
      2598 (Print) (2015).
25.   B UEVICH, A. V. & BAUM, J. Residue-specific real-time NMR diffusion experiments define
      the association states of proteins during folding. Journal of the American Chemical Society
      124, 7156-7162. ISSN : 00027863 (2002).
26.   B URKE, K. A., JANKE, A. M., R HINE, C. L. & FAWZI, N. L. Residue-by-Residue View
      of In Vitro FUS Granules that Bind the C-Terminal Domain of RNA Article Residue-by-
      Residue View of In Vitro FUS Granules that Bind the C-Terminal Domain of RNA Polyme-
      rase II. Molecular Cell 60, 231-241. ISSN : 1097-2765. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
      j.molcel.2015.09.006 (2015).
27.   C AO, D., G AO, Y., ROESLER, C., R ICE, S., D’C UNHA, P., Z HUANG, L., S LACK, J., D OMKE,
      M., A NTONOVA, A., ROMANELLI, S., K EATING, S., F ORERO, G., J UNEJA, P. & L IANG, B.
      Cryo-EM structure of the respiratory syncytial virus RNA polymerase. Nature Communica-
      tions 11, 1-9. ISSN : 20411723. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14246-3
      (2020).
28.   C ARLSON, C. R., A SFAHA, J. B., G HENT, C. M., H OWARD, C. J., H ARTOONI, N., S AFARI,
      M., F RANKEL, A. D. & M ORGAN, D. O. Phosphoregulation of Phase Separation by the
      SARS-CoV-2 N Protein Suggests a Biophysical Basis for its Dual Functions. Molecu-
      lar Cell 80, 1092-1103.e4. ISSN : 1097-2765. https : / / www . sciencedirect . com /
      science/article/pii/S1097276520308030 (2020).
29.   C ARSILLO, T., T RAYLOR, Z., C HOI, C., N IEWIESK, S. & O GLESBEE, M. hsp72, a Host
      Determinant of Measles Virus Neurovirulence. Journal of Virology 80, 11031-11039. ISSN :
      0022-538X (2006).
30.   C ARSILLO, T., T RAYLOR, Z., C HOI, C., N IEWIESK, S. & O GLESBEE, M. hsp72, a host
      determinant of measles virus neurovirulence. eng. Journal of virology 80, 11031-11039.
      ISSN : 0022-538X (Print) (2006).

31.   CAVANAGH, J., FAIRBROTHER, W. J., PALMER, A. G., RANCE, M. & SKELTON,
      N. J. CHAPTER 2 - THEORETICAL DESCRIPTION OF NMR SPECTROSCOPY Second
      Edition (éd. CAVANAGH, J., FAIRBROTHER, W. J., PALMER, A. G., RANCE, M. &
      SKELTON, N. J.) 29-113. ISBN : 978-0-12-164491-8. https://www.sciencedirect.
      com / science / article / pii / B978012164491850004X (Academic Press, Burlington,
      2007).
32.   CAVANAGH, J., FAIRBROTHER, W. J., PALMER, A. G., RANCE, M. & SKELTON,
      N. J. in Protein NMR Spectroscopy (Second Edition) (éd. CAVANAGH, J., FAIRBROTHER,
      W. J., PALMER, A. G., RANCE, M. & SKELTON, N. J.) Second Edition, 271-332 (Aca-
      demic Press, Burlington, 2007). ISBN : 978-0-12-164491-8. https://www.sciencedirect.
      com/science/article/pii/B9780121644918500063.




                                              120


                                                                            BIBLIOGRAPHIE

33.   C EVIK, B., H OLMES, D. E., V ROTSOS, E., F ELLER, J. A., S MALLWOOD, S. & M OYER,
      S. A. The phosphoprotein (P) and L binding sites reside in the N-terminus of the L subunit
      of the measles virus RNA polymerase. Virology 327, 297-306. ISSN : 00426822 (2004).
34.   C HEMES, L. B., A LONSO, L. G., N OVAL, M. G. & de P RAT-G AY, G. Circular Dichroism
      Techniques for the Analysis of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins and Domains (éd. U VERSKY,
      V. N. & D UNKER, A. K.) 387-404. ISBN : 978-1-61779-927-3. https://doi.org/10.
      1007/978-1-61779-927-3_22 (Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2012).
35.   C HOI, J. M., DAR, F. & PAPPU, R. V. LASSI : A lattice model for simulating phase transi-
      tions of multivalent proteins 1-39. ISBN : 1111111111 (2019).
36.   C HONG, P. A., V ERNON, R. M. & F ORMAN -K AY, J. D. RGG/RG Motif Regions in RNA
      Binding and Phase Separation. Journal of Molecular Biology 430. Phase Separation in Bio-
      logy and Disease, 4650-4665. ISSN : 0022-2836. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
      science/article/pii/S0022283618306107 (2018).
37.   C OMMUNIE, G., H ABCHI, J., YABUKARSKI, F., B LOCQUEL, D., S CHNEIDER, R., TARBOURIECH,
      N., PAPAGEORGIOU, N., RUIGROK, R. W., JAMIN, M., J ENSEN, M. R., L ONGHI, S. &
      B LACKLEDGE, M. Atomic Resolution Description of the Interaction between the Nucleo-
      protein and Phosphoprotein of Hendra Virus. PLoS Pathogens 9. ISSN : 15537366 (2013).
38.   C ONICELLA, A. E., Z ERZE, G. H., M ITTAL, J. & FAWZI, N. L. ALS Mutations Dis-
      rupt Phase Separation Mediated by α-Helical Structure in the TDP-43 Low-Complexity
      C-Terminal Domain. eng. Structure (London, England : 1993) 24, 1537-1549. ISSN : 1878-
      4186 (Electronic) (2016).
39.   C ONIS, E. Measles and the Modern History of Vaccination. Public Health Reports 134,
      118-125. ISSN : 14682877 (2019).
40.   C UBUK, J., A LSTON, J. J., I NCICCO, J. J., S INGH, S., S TUCHELL -B RERETON, M. D.,
      WARD, M. D., Z IMMERMAN, M. I., V ITHANI, N., G RIFFITH, D., WAGONER, J. A., B OWMAN,
      G. R., H ALL, K. B., S ORANNO, A. & H OLEHOUSE, A. S. The SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid
      protein is dynamic, disordered, and phase separates with RNA. Nature Communications 12,
      1936. ISSN : 2041-1723. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-21953-3 (2021).
41.   DAS, D. & M UKHOPADHYAY, S. Studying backbone torsional dynamics of intrinsically
      disordered proteins using fluorescence depolarization kinetics. Journal of Biosciences 43,
      455-462. ISSN : 09737138 (2018).
42.   DAS, R. K. & PAPPU, R. V. Conformations of intrinsically disordered proteins are influen-
      ced by linear sequence distributions of oppositely charged residues. Proceedings of the
      National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110, 13392-13397. ISSN :
      00278424 (2013).
43.   DAS, T., S CHUSTER, A., S CHNEIDER -S CHAULIES, S. & BANERJEE, A. K. Involvement
      of Cellular Casein Kinase II in the Phosphorylation of Measles Virus P Protein : Identifi-
      cation of Phosphorylation Sites. Virology 211, 218-226. ISSN : 0042-6822. http://www.
      sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0042682285713943 (1995).
44.   D E B RITO, T., D E FÁTIMA A RAUJO, M. & T IRIBA, A. Ultrastructure of the Negri body
      in human rabies. Journal of the Neurological Sciences 20, 363-372. ISSN : 0022-510X.
      https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / 0022510X73901706
      (1973).
45.   D ELAGLIO, F., G RZESIEK, S., V UISTER, G. W., Z HU, G., P FEIFER, J. & BAX, A. NMR-
      Pipe : a multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX pipes. eng. Journal
      of biomolecular NMR 6, 277-293. ISSN : 0925-2738 (Print) (1995).




                                             121


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

46.   D ERDOWSKI, A., P ETERS, T. R., G LOVER, N., Q IAN, R., U TLEY, T. J., B URNETT, A.,
      W ILLIAMS, J. V., S PEARMAN, P. & C ROWE, J. E. Human metapneumovirus nucleopro-
      tein and phosphoprotein interact and provide the minimal requirements for inclusion body
      formation. Journal of General Virology 89, 2698-2708. ISSN : 00221317 (2008).
47.   D ESFOSSES, A., M ILLES, S., J ENSEN, M. R., G USEVA, S., C OLLETIER, J. P., M AURIN, D.,
      S CHOEHN, G., G UTSCHE, I., RUIGROK, R. W. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Assembly and cryo-
      EM structures of RNA-specific measles virus nucleocapsids provide mechanistic insight
      into paramyxoviral replication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
      United States of America 116, 4256-4264. ISSN : 10916490 (2019).
48.   D EVAUX, P., P RINISKI, L. & C ATTANEO, R. The measles virus phosphoprotein interacts
      with the linker domain of STAT1. eng. Virology 444, 250-256. ISSN : 1096-0341 (Electro-
      nic) (2013).
49.   D INESH, D. C., C HALUPSKA, D., S ILHAN, J., KOUTNA, E., N ENCKA, R., V EVERKA,
      V. & B OURA, E. Structural basis of RNA recognition by the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid
      phosphoprotein. PLOS Pathogens 16, 1-16. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal .
      ppat.1009100 (2020).
50.   D RAKE, J. W. & H OLLAND, J. J. Mutation rates among RNA viruses. Proceedings of the
      National Academy of Sciences 96, 13910-13913. ISSN : 0027-8424. eprint : https://www.
      pnas.org/content/96/24/13910.full.pdf. https://www.pnas.org/content/96/
      24/13910 (1999).
51.   D UDÁS, E. F. & B ODOR, A. Quantitative, Diffusion NMR Based Analytical Tool to Dis-
      tinguish Folded, Disordered, and Denatured Biomolecules. Analytical Chemistry 91, 4929-
      4933. ISSN : 15206882 (2019).
52.   D ÜX, A., L EQUIME, S., PATRONO, L. V., V RANCKEN, B., B ORAL, S., G OGARTEN, J. F.,
      H ILBIG, A., H ORST, D., M ERKEL, K., P REPOINT, B., S ANTIBANEZ, S., S CHLOTTERBECK,
      J., S UCHARD, M. A., U LRICH, M., W IDULIN, N., M ANKERTZ, A., L EENDERTZ, F. H.,
      H ARPER, K., S CHNALKE, T., L EMEY, P. & C ALVIGNAC -S PENCER, S. Measles virus and
      rinderpest virus divergence dated to the sixth century BCE. Science 368, 1367 LP -1370.
      http://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6497/1367.abstract (2020).
53.   DYSON, H. J. Making Sense of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. Biophysical Journal 110,
      1013-1016. ISSN : 15420086. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2016.01.030
      (2016).
54.   E LBAUM - GARFINKLE, S., K IM, Y., S ZCZEPANIAK, K. & C HEN, C. C.-h. The disordered
      P granule protein LAF-1 drives phase separation into droplets with tunable viscosity and
      dynamics. 112 (2015).
55.   FAWZI, N. L., Y ING, J., G HIRLANDO, R., T ORCHIA, D. A. & C LORE, G. M. protofibrils
      probed by solution NMR. Nature 480, 268-272 (2012).
56.   F EARNS, R., YOUNG, D. F. & R ANDALL, R. E. Evidence that the paramyxovirus simian
      virus 5 can establish quiescent infections by remaining inactive in cytoplasmic inclusion
      bodies. Journal of General Virology 75, 3525-3539. ISSN : 00221317 (1994).
57.   F ERIC, M. & B RANGWYNNE, C. P. A nuclear F-actin scaffold stabilizes ribonucleoprotein
      droplets against gravity in large cells. eng. Nature cell biology 15, 1253-1259. ISSN : 1476-
      4679. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23995731%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.
      nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3789854/ (2013).
58.   F ERIC, M., VAIDYA, N., H ARMON, T. S., M ITREA, D. M., Z HU, L., R ICHARDSON, T. M.,
      K RIWACKI, R. W., PAPPU, R. V. & B RANGWYNNE, C. P. Coexisting Liquid Phases Un-
      derlie Nucleolar Subcompartments. Cell 165, 1686-1697. ISSN : 10974172. http://dx.
      doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.04.047 (2016).


                                               122


                                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHIE

59.   F ETTERS, L. J., H ADJICHRISTIDIS, N., L INDNER, J. S. & M AYS, J. W. Molecular Weight
      Dependence of Hydrodynamic and Thermodynamic Properties for Well-Defined Linear Po-
      lymers in Solution. Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 23, 619-640. eprint :
      https://doi.org/10.1063/1.555949. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.555949
      (1994).
60.   F ISCHER, H., P OLIKARPOV, I. & C RAIEVICH, A. F. Average protein density is a molecular-
      weight-dependent function. Protein Science 13, 2825-2828. eprint : https://onlinelibrary.
      wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1110/ps.04688204. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
      doi/abs/10.1110/ps.04688204 (2004).
61.   F ISHER, J. Modern NMR techniques for synthetic chemistry 1-330. ISBN : 9781466592254
      (2014).
62.   F LORY, P. J. Thermodynamics of High Polymer Solutions. The Journal of Chemical Phy-
      sics 10, 51-61. eprint : https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1723621. https://doi.org/
      10.1063/1.1723621 (1942).
63.   F OOTE, A. K., M ANGER, L. H., H OLDEN, M. R., M ARGITTAI, M. & G OLDSMITH, R. H.
      Time-resolved multirotational dynamics of single solution-phase tau proteins reveals details
      of conformational variation. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 21, 1863-1871. http://dx.doi.
      org/10.1039/C8CP06971A (4 2019).
64.   F OUQUET, B., N IKOLIC, J., L ARROUS, F., B OURHY, H., W IRBLICH, C., L AGAUDRIÈRE -
      G ESBERT, C. & B LONDEL, D. Focal Adhesion Kinase Is Involved in Rabies Virus Infection
      through Its Interaction with Viral Phosphoprotein P. Journal of Virology 89, 1640-1651.
      ISSN : 0022-538X (2015).

65.   F UENTES -M ONTEVERDE, J. C., B ECKER, S. & R EZAEI -G HALEH, N. Biomolecular phase
      separation through the lens of sodium-23 NMR. Protein Science n/a. eprint : https://
      onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/pro.4010. https://onlinelibrary.
      wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pro.4010.
66.   F UJIMURA, K., S UZUKI, T., YASUDA, Y., M URATA, M., K ATAHIRA, J. & YONEDA, Y.
      Identification of importin 1 as a novel constituent of RNA stress granules. Biochimica
      et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research 1803, 865-871. ISSN : 0167-4889.
      https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii / S0167488910000972
      (2010).
67.   G ABRYELCZYK, B., C AI, H., S HI, X., S UN, Y., S WINKELS, P. J. M., S ALENTINIG, S.,
      P ERVUSHIN, K. & M ISEREZ, A. Hydrogen bond guidance and aromatic stacking drive
      liquid-liquid phase separation of intrinsically disordered histidine-rich peptides. Nature
      Communications. ISSN : 2041-1723. http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 -
      13469-8.
68.   G ANSER, L. R. & M YONG, S. Methods to Study Phase-Separated Condensates and the
      Underlying Molecular Interactions. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 45, 1004-1005. ISSN :
      13624326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2020.05.011 (2020).
69.   G ARCÍA -BARRENO, B., D ELGADO, T. & M ELERO, J. A. Identification of protein regions
      involved in the interaction of human respiratory syncytial virus phosphoprotein and nucleo-
      protein : significance for nucleocapsid assembly and formation of cytoplasmic inclusions.
      Journal of virology 70, 801-808. ISSN : 0022-538X (1996).
70.   G HOSH, A., M AZARAKOS, K. & Z HOU, H.-x. Three archetypical classes of macromolecu-
      lar regulators of protein liquid – liquid phase separation. 116 (2019).
71.   G IBSON, T. J. Cell regulation : determined to signal discrete cooperation. Trends in Bio-
      chemical Sciences 34, 471-482. ISSN : 09680004 (2009).


                                              123


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

72.   G ILL, M. L., B YRD, R. A. & PALMER, A. G. Dynamics of GCN4 facilitate DNA inter-
      action : A model-free analysis of an intrinsically disordered region. Physical Chemistry
      Chemical Physics 18, 5839-5849. ISSN : 14639076 (2016).
73.   G ILMAN, M. S. A., L IU, C., F UNG, A., B EHERA, I., J ORDAN, P., R IGAUX, P., Y SEBAERT,
      N., T CHERNIUK, S., S OURIMANT, J., E LÉOUËT, J.-F., S UTTO -O RTIZ, P., D ECROLY, E.,
      ROYMANS, D., J IN, Z. & M C L ELLAN, J. S. Structure of the Respiratory Syncytial Virus
      Polymerase Complex. Cell 179, 193-204.e14. ISSN : 0092-8674. https://doi.org/10.
      1016/j.cell.2019.08.014 (2019).
74.   G IUNTA, C. J. & M AINZ, V. V. Discovery of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance : Rabi, Purcell,
      and Bloch. ACS Symposium Series 1349, 3-20. ISSN : 19475918 (2020).
75.   G OMES, G. N., K RZEMINSKI, M., M ARTIN, E. W., M ITTAG, T., H EAD -G ORDON, T.,
      F ORMAN -K AY, J. D. & G RADINARU, C. C. Integrating smFRET, SAXS and NMR data
      to infer structural ensembles of an intrinsically-disordered protein. bioRxiv, 1-25 (2020).
76.   G ORDON, D. E. et al. A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug
      repurposing. Nature 583, 459-468. ISSN : 1476-4687. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 /
      s41586-020-2286-9 (2020).
77.   G OTOH, B., KOMATSU, T., TAKEUCHI, K. & YOKOO, J. The C-terminal half-fragment of
      the Sendai virus C protein prevents the gamma-activated factor from binding to a gamma-
      activated sequence site. eng. Virology 316, 29-40. ISSN : 0042-6822 (Print) (2003).
78.   G RIMA, R. Intrinsic biochemical noise in crowded intracellular conditions. The Journal
      of Chemical Physics 132, 185102. eprint : https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3427244.
      https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3427244 (2010).
79.   G UERRA, F. M., B OLOTIN, S., L IM, G., H EFFERNAN, J., D EEKS, S. L., L I, Y. & C ROWCROFT,
      N. S. The basic reproduction number (R0) of measles : a systematic review. The Lancet In-
      fectious Diseases 17, e420-e428. ISSN : 14744457. http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 /
      S1473-3099(17)30307-9 (2017).
80.   G UILLÉN -B OIXET, J., KOPACH, A., H OLEHOUSE, A. S., W ITTMANN, S., JAHNEL, M.,
      S CHLÜSSLER, R., K IM, K., T RUSSINA, I. R., WANG, J., M ATEJU, D., P OSER, I., M AHARANA,
      S., RUER -G RUSS, M., R ICHTER, D., Z HANG, X., C HANG, Y.-T., G UCK, J., H ONIGMANN,
      A., M AHAMID, J., H YMAN, A. A., PAPPU, R. V., A LBERTI, S. & F RANZMANN, T. M.
      RNA-Induced Conformational Switching and Clustering of G3BP Drive Stress Granule
      Assembly by Condensation. Cell 181, 346-361.e17. ISSN : 0092-8674. https : / / www .
      sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0092867420303421 (2020).
81.   G UINIER , A NDRÉ. La diffraction des rayons X aux très petits angles : application à l’étude
      de phénomènes ultramicroscopiques. Ann. Phys. 11, 161-237. https://doi.org/10.
      1051/anphys/193911120161 (1939).
82.   G USEVA, S., M ILLES, S., B LACKLEDGE, M. & RUIGROK, R. W. H. The Nucleoprotein and
      Phosphoprotein of Measles Virus. Frontiers in Microbiology 10, 1832. ISSN : 1664-302X.
      https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2019.01832 (2019).
83.   G UTSCHE, I., D ESFOSSES, A., E FFANTIN, G., L ING, W. L., H AUPT, M., RUIGROK, R. W.,
      S ACHSE, C. & S CHOEHN, G. Near-atomic cryo-EM structure of the helical measles virus
      nucleocapsid. Science 348, 704-707. ISSN : 10959203 (2015).
84.   H AGIWARA, K., S ATO, H., I NOUE, Y., WATANABE, A., YONEDA, M., I KEDA, F., F UJITA,
      K., F UKUDA, H., TAKAMURA, C., KOZUKA -H ATA, H., OYAMA, M., S UGANO, S., O HMI,
      S. & K AI, C. Phosphorylation of measles virus nucleoprotein upregulates the transcrip-
      tional activity of minigenomic RNA. PROTEOMICS 8, 1871-1879. eprint : https : / /
      onlinelibrary . wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / pmic . 200701051. https : / /
      onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pmic.200701051 (2008).


                                               124


                                                                                BIBLIOGRAPHIE

85.   H ALLE, B. & DAVIDOVIC, M. Biomolecular hydration : From water dynamics to hydrody-
      namics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
      100, 12135-12140. ISSN : 00278424 (2003).
86.   H ANSEN, D. F., VALLURUPALLI, P. & K AY, L. E. An improved 15N relaxation dispersion
      experiment for the measurement of millisecond time-scale dynamics in proteins. Journal of
      Physical Chemistry B 112, 5898-5904. ISSN : 15206106 (2008).
87.   H ARMON, T. S., H OLEHOUSE, A. S., ROSEN, M. K. & PAPPU, R. V. Intrinsically disor-
      dered linkers determine the interplay between phase separation and gelation in multivalent
      proteins. bioRxiv, 1-31. ISSN : 2050-084X (2017).
88.   H ARTLMÜLLER, C., S PREITZER, E., G ÖBL, C., FALSONE, F. & M ADL, T. NMR characte-
      rization of solvent accessibility and transient structure in intrinsically disordered proteins.
      Journal of Biomolecular NMR 73, 305-317. ISSN : 15735001. https://doi.org/10.
      1007/s10858-019-00248-2 (2019).
89.   H ARTMAN, N. C. & G ROVES, J. T. Signaling clusters in the cell membrane. Current Opi-
      nion in Cell Biology 23. Membranes and organelles, 370-376. ISSN : 0955-0674. https:
      //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095506741100072X (2011).
90.   H EINRICH, B. S., M ALIGA, Z., S TEIN, D. A., H YMAN, A. A. & W HELAN, S. P. Phase
      transitions drive the formation of vesicular stomatitis virus replication compartments. mBio
      9, 1-10. ISSN : 21507511 (2018).
91.   H ELMUS, J. J. & JARONIEC, C. P. Nmrglue : an open source Python package for the analysis
      of multidimensional NMR data. Journal of Biomolecular NMR 55, 355-367. ISSN : 1573-
      5001. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10858-013-9718-x (2013).
92.   H OISCHEN, C., M ONAJEMBASHI, S., W EISSHART, K. & H EMMERICH, P. Multimodal
      Light Microscopy Approaches to Reveal Structural and Functional Properties of Promyelo-
      cytic Leukemia Nuclear Bodies. Frontiers in Oncology 8, 125. ISSN : 2234-943X. https:
      //www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fonc.2018.00125 (2018).
93.   H ORIKAMI, S. M., S MALLWOOD, S., BANKAMP, B. & M OYER, S. A. An amino-proximal
      domain of the L protein binds to the P protein in the measles virus RNA polymerase com-
      plex. eng. Virology 205, 540-545. ISSN : 0042-6822 (Print) (1994).
94.   H ORWITZ, J. A., J ENNI, S., H ARRISON, S. C. & W HELAN, S. P. Structure of a rabies virus
      polymerase complex from electron cryo-microscopy. bioRxiv (2019).
95.   H ORWITZ, J. A., J ENNI, S., H ARRISON, S. C. & W HELAN, S. P. Structure of a rabies virus
      polymerase complex from electron cryo-microscopy. Proceedings of the National Academy
      of Sciences of the United States of America 117, 2099-2107. ISSN : 10916490 (2020).
96.   H UGGINS, M. L. Some Properties of Solutions of Long-chain Compounds. The Journal
      of Physical Chemistry 46, 151-158. ISSN : 0092-7325. https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 /
      j150415a018 (1942).
97.   I JAVI, M., S TYLE, R. W., E MMANOUILIDIS, L., K UMAR, A., M EIER, S. M., T ORZYNSKI,
      A. L., A LLAIN, F. H. T., BARRAL, Y., S TEINMETZ, M. O. & D UFRESNE, E. R. Surface
      tensiometry of phase separated protein and polymer droplets by the sessile drop method
      2020. arXiv : 2007.13502 [cond-mat.soft].
98.   I SERMAN, C., RODEN, C., B OERNEKE, M., S EALFON, R., M C L AUGHLIN, G., J UNGREIS,
      I., PARK, C., B OPPANA, A., F RITCH, E., H OU, Y. J., T HEESFELD, C., T ROYANSKAYA,
      O. G., BARIC, R. S., S HEAHAN, T. P., W EEKS, K. & G LADFELTER, A. S. Specific vi-
      ral RNA drives the SARS CoV-2 nucleocapsid to phase separate. eng. bioRxiv : the pre-
      print server for biology, 2020.06.11.147199. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
      32587965%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7310621/ (2020).


                                               125


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

 99.   I VERSON, L. E. & ROSE, J. K. Localized attenuation and discontinuous synthesis during
       vesicular stomatitis virus transcription. Cell 23, 477-484. ISSN : 0092-8674. https : / /
       www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0092867481901434 (1981).
100.   JAIN, N., B HATTACHARYA, M. & M UKHOPADHYAY, S. Chain collapse of an amyloidoge-
       nic intrinsically disordered protein. Biophysical Journal 101, 1720-1729. ISSN : 00063495.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2011.08.024 (2011).
101.   J ENNI, S., B LOYET, L. M., D IAZ -AVALOS, R., L IANG, B., W HELAN, S. P., G RIGORIEFF,
       N. & H ARRISON, S. C. Structure of the Vesicular Stomatitis Virus L Protein in Complex
       with Its Phosphoprotein Cofactor. Cell Reports 30, 53-60.e5. ISSN : 22111247. https :
       //doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.12.024 (2020).
102.   J ENSEN, M. R., C OMMUNIE, G., R IBEIRO, E. A., M ARTINEZ, N., D ESFOSSES, A., S ALMON,
       L., M OLLICA, L., G ABEL, F., JAMIN, M., L ONGHI, S., RUIGROK, R. W. & B LACKLEDGE,
       M. Intrinsic disorder in measles virus nucleocapsids. Proceedings of the National Academy
       of Sciences of the United States of America 108, 9839-9844. ISSN : 00278424 (2011).
103.   J ENSEN, M. R., H OUBEN, K., L ESCOP, E., B LANCHARD, L., RUIGROK, R. W. H. &
       B LACKLEDGE, M. Quantitative conformational analysis of partially folded proteins from
       residual dipolar couplings : application to the molecular recognition element of Sendai vi-
       rus nucleoprotein. J Am Chem Soc 130, 8055-61 (2008).
104.   J ENSEN, M. R., M ARKWICK, P. R. L., M EIER, S., G RIESINGER, C., Z WECKSTETTER,
       M., G RZESIEK, S., B ERNADÓ, P. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Quantitative Determination of the
       Conformational Properties of Partially Folded and Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Using
       NMR Dipolar Couplings. Structure 17, 1169-1185. ISSN : 09692126 (2009).
105.   J ENSEN, M. R., S ALMON, L., N ODET, G. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Defining conformational
       ensembles of intrinsically disordered and partially folded proteins directly from chemical
       shifts. Journal of the American Chemical Society 132, 1270-1272. ISSN : 15205126 (2010).
106.   J IANG, Y., Q IN, Y. & C HEN, M. Host-pathogen interactions in measles virus replication
       and anti-viral immunity. Viruses 8. ISSN : 19994915 (2016).
107.   J UNG, Y.-S. & Z WECKSTETTER, M. Mars - robust automatic backbone assignment of pro-
       teins. Journal of Biomolecular NMR 30, 11-23. ISSN : 1573-5001. https://doi.org/10.
       1023/B:JNMR.0000042954.99056.ad (2004).
108.   K ARLIN, D. & B ELSHAW, R. Detecting remote sequence homology in disordered proteins :
       Discovery of conserved motifs in the N-termini of mononegavirales phosphoproteins. PLoS
       ONE 7. ISSN : 19326203 (2012).
109.   K ATOH, H., NAKATSU, Y., K UBOTA, T., S AKATA, M., TAKEDA, M. & K IDOKORO, M.
       Mumps Virus Is Released from the Apical Surface of Polarized Epithelial Cells, and the
       Release Is Facilitated by a Rab11-Mediated Transport System. Journal of Virology 89,
       12026-12034. ISSN : 0022-538X (2015).
110.   K EDERSHA, N. & A NDERSON, P. Stress granules : Sites of mRNA triage that regulate
       mRNA stability and translatability. Biochemical Society Transactions 30, 963-969. ISSN :
       03005127 (2002).
111.   K IM, T. H., T SANG, B., V ERNON, R. M., S ONENBERG, N., K AY, L. E. & F ORMAN -K AY,
       J. D. Phospho-dependent phase separation of FMRP and CAPRIN1 recapitulates regulation
       of translation and deadenylation. eng. Science (New York, N.Y.) 365, 825-829. ISSN : 1095-
       9203 (Electronic) (2019).
112.   K LEIN, I. A. et al. Partitioning of cancer therapeutics in nuclear condensates. Science 368,
       1386 LP -1392. http : / / science . sciencemag . org / content / 368 / 6497 / 1386 .
       abstract (2020).


                                                126


                                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHIE

113.   K LOSIN, A., O LTSCH, F., H ARMON, T., H ONIGMANN, A., J ÜLICHER, F., H YMAN, A. A.
       & Z ECHNER, C. Phase separation provides a mechanism to reduce noise in cells. Science
       367, 464-468. ISSN : 0036-8075. eprint : https://science.sciencemag.org/content/
       367/6476/464.full.pdf. https://science.sciencemag.org/content/367/6476/
       464 (2020).
114.   KOHN, J. E., M ILLETT, I. S., JACOB, J., Z AGROVIC, B., D ILLON, T. M., C INGEL, N.,
       D OTHAGER, R. S., S EIFERT, S., T HIYAGARAJAN, P., S OSNICK, T. R., H ASAN, M. Z.,
       PANDE, V. S., RUCZINSKI, I., D ONIACH, S. & P LAXCO, K. W. Random-coil behavior
       and the dimensions of chemically unfolded proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy
       of Sciences 101, 12491-12496. ISSN : 0027-8424. eprint : https : / / www . pnas . org /
       content/101/34/12491.full.pdf. https://www.pnas.org/content/101/34/
       12491 (2004).
115.   KOSOL, S., C ONTRERAS -M ARTOS, S., C EDEÑO, C. & T OMPA, P. Structural characteriza-
       tion of intrinsically disordered proteins by NMR spectroscopy. Molecules 18, 10802-10828.
       ISSN : 14203049 (2013).

116.   K RAINER, G., W ELSH, T., J OSEPH, J., E SPINOSA, J., W ITTMANN, S., de C SILLÉRY,
       E., S RIDHAR, A., T OPRAKCIOGLU, Z., G UDIŠKYT Ė, G., C ZEKALSKA, M., A RTER, W.,
       G EORGE -H YSLOP, P. S., H YMAN, A., C OLLEPARDO -G UEVARA, R., A LBERTI, S. & K NOWLES,
       T. Reentrant liquid condensate phase of proteins is stabilized by hydrophobic and non-ionic
       interactions, 1-22 (2020).
117.   L AHAYE, X., V IDY, A., F OUQUET, B. & B LONDEL, D. Hsp70 Protein Positively Regulates
       Rabies Virus Infection. Journal of Virology 86, 4743-4751. ISSN : 0022-538X (2012).
118.   L AHAYE, X., V IDY, A., P OMIER, C., O BIANG, L., H ARPER, F., G AUDIN, Y. & B LONDEL,
       D. Functional Characterization of Negri Bodies (NBs) in Rabies Virus-Infected Cells : Evi-
       dence that NBs Are Sites of Viral Transcription and Replication. Journal of Virology 83,
       7948-7958. ISSN : 0022-538X (2009).
119.   L AKOWICZ, J. R. Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy 3rd ed. eng. ISBN : 9780387312781.
       http://lib.ugent.be/catalog/rug01:001953566 (New York : Springer, 2006).
120.   L AKSONO, B. M., de V RIES, R. D., V ERBURGH, R. J., V ISSER, E. G., de J ONG, A.,
       F RAAIJ, P. L., RUIJS, W. L., N IEUWENHUIJSE, D. F., van den H AM, H. J., KOOPMANS,
       M. P., van Z ELM, M. C., O STERHAUS, A. D. & de S WART, R. L. Studies into the mecha-
       nism of measles-associated immune suppression during a measles outbreak in the Nether-
       lands. Nature Communications 9, 1-10. ISSN : 20411723. http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 .
       1038/s41467-018-07515-0 (2018).
121.   L AMOND, A. I. & S PECTOR, D. L. Nuclear speckles : A model for nuclear organelles.
       Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 4, 605-612. ISSN : 14710072 (2003).
122.   L EBLANC, S. J., K ULKARNI, P. & W ENINGER, K. R. Single molecule FRET : A powerful
       tool to study intrinsically disordered proteins. Biomolecules 8. ISSN : 2218273X (2018).
123.   L EE, W., T ONELLI, M. & M ARKLEY, J. L. NMRFAM-SPARKY : enhanced software for
       biomolecular NMR spectroscopy. eng. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 31, 1325-1327.
       ISSN : 1367-4811. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25505092%20https://www.
       ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4393527/ (2015).
124.   L EMKE, E. A. Site-specific labeling of proteins for single-molecule FRET measurements
       using genetically encoded ketone functionalities. eng. Methods in molecular biology (Clif-
       ton, N.J.) 751, 3-15. ISSN : 1940-6029 (Electronic) (2011).




                                              127


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

125.   L I, P., BANJADE, S., C HENG, H.-C., K IM, S., C HEN, B., G UO, L., L LAGUNO, M., H OLLINGSWORTH,
       J. V., K ING, D. S., BANANI, S. F., RUSSO, P. S., J IANG, Q.-X., N IXON, B. T. & ROSEN,
       M. K. Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins. Nature 483,
       336-340. ISSN : 1476-4687. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10879 (2012).
126.   L I, Z., G UO, D., Q IN, Y. & C HEN, M. PI4KB on Inclusion Bodies Formed by ER Mem-
       brane Remodeling Facilitates Replication of Human Parainfluenza Virus Type 3. eng. Cell
       reports 29, 2229-2242.e4. ISSN : 2211-1247 (Electronic) (2019).
127.   L IANG, B., L I, Z., J ENNI, S., R AHMEH, A. A., M ORIN, B. M., G RANT, T., G RIGORIEFF,
       N., H ARRISON, S. C. & W HELAN, S. P. J. Structure of the L Protein of Vesicular Stomatitis
       Virus from Electron Cryomicroscopy. Cell 162, 314-327. ISSN : 0092-8674. https : / /
       doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.06.018 (2015).
128.   L IPAD, G. & S ZABO, A. Model-Free Approach to the Interpretation of Nuclear Magne-
       tic Resonance Relaxation in Macromolecules. Theory and Range of Validity. JACS 104,
       45464559. ISSN : 0092-8674. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
       pii/0092867481901434 (1982).
129.   M AJUMDAR, A., D OGRA, P., M AITY, S. & M UKHOPADHYAY, S. Liquid Liquid Phase
       Separation Is Driven by Large-Scale Conformational Unwinding and Fluctuations of In-
       trinsically Disordered Protein Molecules (2019).
130.   M ALUR, A. G., G UPTA, N. K., D E, B. P. & BANERJEE, A. K. Analysis of the mutations in
       the active site of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of human parainfluenza virus type
       3 (HPIV3). Gene Expression 10, 93-100. ISSN : 10522166 (2002).
131.   M ARSH, J. A., S INGH, V. K., J IA, Z. & F ORMAN -K AY, J. D. Sensitivity of secondary
       structure propensities to sequence differences between α- and γ-synuclein : Implications
       for fibrillation. Protein Science 15, 2795-2804. ISSN : 09618368 (2006).
132.   M ARTIN, E. W., H OLEHOUSE, A. S., P ERAN, I., FARAG, M., I NCICCO, J. J., B REMER,
       A., G RACE, C. R., S ORANNO, A., PAPPU, R. V. & M ITTAG, T. Valence and patterning of
       aromatic residues determine the phase behavior of prion-like domains. Science 367, 694-
       699. ISSN : 10959203 (2020).
133.   M ARTIN, E. W. & M ITTAG, T. Relationship of Sequence and Phase Separation in Protein
       Low-Complexity Regions. Biochemistry 57, 2478-2487. ISSN : 15204995 (2018).
134.   M ASTERS, P. S. & BANERJEE, A. K. Complex formation with vesicular stomatitis virus
       phosphoprotein NS prevents binding of nucleocapsid protein N to nonspecific RNA. J
       Virol 62, 2658-64 (1988).
135.   M C C ONNELL, H. M. Reaction Rates by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. The Journal of Che-
       mical Physics 28, 430-431. eprint : https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1744152. https:
       //doi.org/10.1063/1.1744152 (1958).
136.   M ILLES, S., J ENSEN, M. R., C OMMUNIE, G., M AURIN, D., S CHOEHN, G., RUIGROK,
       R. W. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Self-Assembly of Measles Virus Nucleocapsid-like Particles :
       Kinetics and RNA Sequence Dependence. Angewandte Chemie - International Edition 55,
       9356-9360. ISSN : 15213773 (2016).
137.   M ILLES, S., J ENSEN, M. R., L AZERT, C., G USEVA, S., I VASHCHENKO, S., C OMMUNIE,
       G., M AURIN, D., G ERLIER, D., RUIGROK, R. W. & B LACKLEDGE, M. An ultraweak in-
       teraction in the intrinsically disordered replication machinery is essential for measles virus
       function. Science Advances 4, 1-11. ISSN : 23752548 (2018).
138.   M ILLES, S., M ERCADANTE, D., A RAMBURU, I. V., J ENSEN, M. R., BANTERLE, N., KOEHLER,
       C., T YAGI, S., C LARKE, J., S HAMMAS, S. L., B LACKLEDGE, M., G RÄTER, F. & L EMKE,
       E. A. Plasticity of an Ultrafast Interaction between Nucleoporins and Nuclear Transport
       Receptors. Cell 163, 734-745. ISSN : 10974172 (2015).


                                                128


                                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHIE

139.   M INA, M. J., K ULA, T., L ENG, Y., L I, M., V RIES, R. D. D., K NIP, M., S ILJANDER, H.,
       R EWERS, M., C HOY, D. F., W ILSON, M. S., L ARMAN, H. B., N ELSON, A. N., G RIFFIN,
       D. E., S WART, R. L. D. & E LLEDGE, S. J. other pathogens. 606, 599-606 (2019).
140.   M ITREA, D. M., C IKA, J. A., G UY, C. S., BAN, D., BANERJEE, P. R., S TANLEY, C. B.,
       N OURSE, A., D ENIZ, A. A. & K RIWACKI, R. W. Nucleophosmin integrates within the
       nucleolus via multi-modal interactions with proteins displaying R-rich linear motifs and
       rRNA, 1-33 (2016).
141.   M ONAHAN, Z., RYAN, V. H., JANKE, A. M., B URKE, K. A., R HOADS, S. N., Z ERZE, G. H.,
       O’M EALLY, R., D IGNON, G. L., C ONICELLA, A. E., Z HENG, W., B EST, R. B., C OLE,
       R. N., M ITTAL, J., S HEWMAKER, F. & FAWZI, N. L. Phosphorylation of the FUS low-
       complexity domain disrupts phase separation, aggregation, and toxicity. eng. The EMBO
       journal 36, 2951-2967. ISSN : 1460-2075. https : / / pubmed . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov /
       28790177%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5641905/ (2017).
142.   M OYER, S. A., BAKER, S. C. & H ORIKAMI, S. M. Host cell proteins required for measles
       virus reproduction. Journal of General Virology 71, 775-783. ISSN : 00221317 (1990).
143.   M ÜHLEBACH, M. D., M ATEO, M., S INN, P. L., P RÜFER, S., K ATHARINA, M., L EONARD,
       V. H. J., NAVARATNARAJAH, C. K., F RENZKE, M., X IAO, X., S AWATSKY, B., R AMACHANDRAN,
       S., J R, P. B. M. & C ICHUTEK, K. receptor for measles virus. 480, 530-533 (2012).
144.   M UKRASCH, M. D., B IBOW, S., KORUKOTTU, J., J EGANATHAN, S., B IERNAT, J., G RIESINGER,
       C., M ANDELKOW, E. & Z WECKSTETTER, M. Structural polymorphism of 441-residue Tau
       at single residue resolution. PLoS Biology 7, 0399-0414. ISSN : 15449173 (2009).
145.   M UNDAY, D. C., W U, W., S MITH, N., F IX, J., N OTON, S. L., G ALLOUX, M., T OUZELET,
       O., A RMSTRONG, S. D., DAWSON, J. M., A LJABR, W., E ASTON, A. J., R AMEIX -W ELTI,
       M.-A., de O LIVEIRA, A. P., S IMABUCO, F. M., V ENTURA, A. M., H UGHES, D. J., BARR,
       J. N., F EARNS, R., D IGARD, P., E LÉOUËT, J.-F. & H ISCOX, J. A. Interactome Analysis
       of the Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus RNA Polymerase Complex Identifies Protein
       Chaperones as Important Cofactors That Promote L-Protein Stability and RNA Synthesis.
       Journal of Virology 89, 917-930. ISSN : 0022-538X (2015).
146.   M URTHY, A. C., D IGNON, G. L., K AN, Y., Z ERZE, G. H., PAREKH, S. H., M ITTAL, J. &
       FAWZI, N. L. Molecular interactions underlying liquid liquid phase separation of the FUS
       low-complexity domain. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 26. ISSN : 1545-9985.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41594-019-0250-x (2019).
147.   N IKOLIC, J., L E BARS, R., L AMA, Z., S CRIMA, N., L AGAUDRIÈRE -G ESBERT, C., G AUDIN,
       Y. & B LONDEL, D. Negri bodies are viral factories with properties of liquid organelles. Na-
       ture Communications 8, 1-12. ISSN : 20411723. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
       017-00102-9 (2017).
148.   N ODET, G., S ALMON, L., O ZENNE, V., M EIER, S., J ENSEN, M. R. & B LACKLEDGE, M.
       Quantitative Description of Backbone Conformational Sampling of Unfolded Proteins at
       Amino Acid Resolution from NMR Residual Dipolar Couplings. Journal of the American
       Chemical Society 131, 17908-17918. ISSN : 0002-7863. https://doi.org/10.1021/
       ja9069024 (2009).
149.   O’F LYNN, B. G. & M ITTAG, T. The role of liquid–liquid phase separation in regulating
       enzyme activity. Current Opinion in Cell Biology 69, 70-79. ISSN : 18790410. arXiv :
       2010.11343 (2021).




                                              129


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

150.   OATES, M. E., ROMERO, P., I SHIDA, T., G HALWASH, M., M IZIANTY, M. J., X UE, B.,
       D OSZTÁNYI, Z., U VERSKY, V. N., O BRADOVIC, Z., K URGAN, L., D UNKER, A. K. &
       G OUGH, J. D2P2 : database of disordered protein predictions. Nucleic Acids Research 41,
       D508-D516. ISSN : 0305-1048. eprint : https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-
       pdf/41/D1/D508/3693476/gks1226.pdf. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1226
       (2012).
151.   O MI -F URUTANI, M., YONEDA, M., F UJITA, K., I KEDA, F. & K AI, C. Novel Phosphoprotein-
       Interacting Region in Nipah Virus Nucleocapsid Protein and Its Involvement in Viral Re-
       plication. Journal of Virology 84, 9793-9799. ISSN : 0022-538X (2010).
152.   O ZENNE, V., S CHNEIDER, R., YAO, M., H UANG, J. R., S ALMON, L., Z WECKSTETTER,
       M., J ENSEN, M. R. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Mapping the potential energy landscape of in-
       trinsically disordered proteins at amino acid resolution. Journal of the American Chemical
       Society 134, 15138-15148. ISSN : 00027863 (2012).
153.   PALMER, A. G. NMR characterization of the dynamics of biomacromolecules. Chemical
       Reviews 104, 3623-3640. ISSN : 00092665 (2004).
154.   PAN, J., Q IAN, X., L ATTMANN, S., E L S AHILI, A., Y EO, T. H., J IA, H., C RESSEY, T.,
       L UDEKE, B., N OTON, S., K ALOCSAY, M., F EARNS, R. & L ESCAR, J. Structure of the hu-
       man metapneumovirus polymerase phosphoprotein complex. Nature 577, 275-279. ISSN :
       1476-4687. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1759-1 (2020).
155.   PARK, S., BARNES, R., L IN, Y., jin J EON, B., NAJAFI, S., D ELANEY, K. T., F REDRICKSON,
       G. H., S HEA, J. E., H WANG, D. S. & H AN, S. Dehydration entropy drives liquid-liquid
       phase separation by molecular crowding. Communications Chemistry 3, 1-12. ISSN : 23993669
       (2020).
156.   PARKS, G. D. Mapping of a region of the paramyxovirus L protein required for the forma-
       tion of a stable complex with the viral phosphoprotein P. Journal of Virology 68, 4862-4872.
       ISSN : 0022-538X (1994).

157.   P ELUPESSY, P., E SPALLARGAS, G. M. & B ODENHAUSEN, G. Symmetrical reconversion :
       measuring cross-correlation rates with enhanced accuracy. Journal of Magnetic Resonance
       161, 258-264. ISSN : 1090-7807. https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science /
       article/pii/S1090780702001908 (2003).
158.   P ERDIKARI, T. M., M URTHY, A. C., RYAN, V. H., WATTERS, S., NAIK, M. T. & FAWZI,
       N. L. SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein phase-separates with RNA and with human hnRNPs.
       The EMBO Journal 39, e106478. eprint : https://www.embopress.org/doi/pdf/10.
       15252/embj.2020106478. https://www.embopress.org/doi/abs/10.15252/embj.
       2020106478 (2020).
159.   P ERRY, S. L. Phase separation : Bridging polymer physics and biology. Current Opinion in
       Colloid and Interface Science 39, 86-97. ISSN : 18790399. https://doi.org/10.1016/
       j.cocis.2019.01.007 (2019).
160.   P LATTET, P., A LVES, L., H ERREN, M. & AGUILAR, H. C. Measles virus fusion protein :
       Structure, function and inhibition. Viruses 8. ISSN : 19994915 (2016).
161.   P OMBO, A., C UELLO, P., S CHUL, W., YOON, J. B., ROEDER, R. G., C OOK, P. R. &
       M URPHY, S. Regional and temporal specialization in the nucleus : A transcriptionally-
       active nuclear domain rich in PTF, Oct1 and PIKA antigens associates with specific chro-
       mosomes early in the cell cycle. EMBO Journal 17, 1768-1778. ISSN : 02614189 (1998).
162.   P ONT, V. D., J IANG, Y. & P LEMPER, R. K. Bipartite interface of the measles virus phospho-
       protein X domain with the large polymerase protein regulates viral polymerase dynamics.
       PLoS Pathogens 15, 1-27. ISSN : 15537374 (2019).


                                               130


                                                                               BIBLIOGRAPHIE

163.   P ORTER, C. T. & M ARTIN, A. C. R. BiopLib and BiopTools–a C programming library and
       toolset for manipulating protein structure. eng. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 31, 4017-
       4019. ISSN : 1367-4811. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26323716%20https:
       //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4673973/ (2015).
164.   P RECIOUS, B., YOUNG, D. F., B ERMINGHAM, A., F EARNS, R., RYAN, M. & R ANDALL,
       R. E. Inducible expression of the P, V, and NP genes of the paramyxovirus simian virus 5
       in cell lines and an examination of NP-P and NP-V interactions. Journal of virology 69,
       8001-8010. ISSN : 0022-538X (1995).
165.   P URCELL, E. M., T ORREY, H. C. & P OUND, R. V. Resonance Absorption by Nuclear
       Magnetic Moments in a Solid. Phys. Rev. 69, 37-38. https://link.aps.org/doi/10.
       1103/PhysRev.69.37 (1-2 1946).
166.   Q UIROZ, F. G. & C HILKOTI, A. Sequence heuristics to encode phase behaviour in intrinsi-
       cally disordered protein polymers. eng. Nature materials 14, 1164-1171. ISSN : 1476-1122.
       https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26390327%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
       gov/pmc/articles/PMC4618764/ (2015).
167.   R AHMEH, A. A., M ORIN, B., S CHENK, A. D., L IANG, B., H EINRICH, B. S., B RUSIC,
       V., WALZ, T. & W HELAN, S. P. Critical phosphoprotein elements that regulate polymerase
       architecture and function in vesicular stomatitis virus. Proceedings of the National Academy
       of Sciences of the United States of America 109, 14628-14633. ISSN : 00278424 (2012).
168.   R AHMEH, A. A., S CHENK, A. D., DANEK, E. I., K RANZUSCH, P. J., L IANG, B., WALZ, T.
       & W HELAN, S. P. Molecular architecture of the vesicular stomatitis virus RNA polymerase.
       Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107,
       20075-20080. ISSN : 10916490 (2010).
169.   RAMACHANDRAN, G. N., RAMAKRISHNAN, C. & SASISEKHARAN, V. Stereo-
       chemistry of polypeptide chain configurations. eng. Journal of molecular biology 7, 95-99.
       ISSN : 0022-2836 (Print) (1963).

170.   R ASKATOV, J. A. & T EPLOW, D. B. Using chirality to probe the conformational dynamics
       and assembly of intrinsically disordered amyloid proteins. Scientific Reports 7, 1-7. ISSN :
       20452322. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-10525-5 (2017).
171.   R AY, S., S INGH, N., PANDEY, S., K UMAR, R., G ADHE, L., DATTA, D., PATEL, K., M AHATO,
       J., NAVALKAR, A., PANIGRAHI, R., C HATTERJEE, D., M AITI, S., B HATIA, S., M EHRA,
       S., S INGH, A., G EREZ, J., C HOWDHURY, A., K UMAR, A., PADINHATEERI, R., R IEK, R.,
       K RISHNAMOORTHY, G. & M AJI, S. K. Liquid-liquid phase separation and liquid-to-solid
       transition mediate -synuclein amyloid fibril containing hydrogel formation. bioRxiv. eprint :
       https : / / www . biorxiv . org / content / early / 2019 / 04 / 26 / 619858 . full . pdf.
       https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2019/04/26/619858 (2019).
172.   R EICHHELD, S. E., M UIZNIEKS, L. D., K EELEY, F. W. & S HARPE, S. Direct observation
       of structure and dynamics during phase separation of an elastomeric protein, 1-8 (2017).
173.   R EZAEI -G HALEH, N., M UNARI, F., B ECKER, S., A SSFALG, M. & G RIESINGER, C. A fa-
       cile oxygen-17 NMR method to determine effective viscosity in dilute, molecularly crow-
       ded and confined aqueous media. Chemical Communications 55, 12404-12407. ISSN :
       1364548X (2019).
174.   R IBEIRO, S. S., S AMANTA, N., E BBINGHAUS, S. & M ARCOS, J. C. The synergic effect
       of water and biomolecules in intracellular phase separation. Nature Reviews Chemistry 3,
       552-561. ISSN : 23973358 (2019).




                                               131


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

175.   R ICHARD, C.-A., R INCHEVAL, V., L ASSOUED, S., F IX, J., C ARDONE, C., E SNEAU, C.,
       N EKHAI, S., G ALLOUX, M., R AMEIX -W ELTI, M.-A., S IZUN, C. & E LÉOUËT, J.-F. RSV
       hijacks cellular protein phosphatase 1 to regulate M2-1 phosphorylation and viral transcrip-
       tion. eng. PLoS pathogens 14, e1006920. ISSN : 1553-7374 (Electronic) (2018).
176.   R INCHEVAL, V., L ELEK, M., G AULT, E., B OUILLIER, C., S ITTERLIN, D., B LOUQUIT-
       L AYE, S., G ALLOUX, M., Z IMMER, C., E LEOUET, J. F. & R AMEIX -W ELTI, M. A. Func-
       tional organization of cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in cells infected by respiratory syncytial
       virus. Nature Communications 8, 1-11. ISSN : 20411723. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
       s41467-017-00655-9 (2017).
177.   ROTA, P. A., M OSS, W. J., TAKEDA, M., D E S WART, R. L., T HOMPSON, K. M. & G OODSON,
       J. L. Measles. Nature Reviews Disease Primers 2. ISSN : 2056676X (2016).
178.   ROTKIEWICZ, P. & S KOLNICK, J. Fast procedure for reconstruction of full-atom protein
       models from reduced representations. eng. Journal of computational chemistry 29, 1460-
       1465. ISSN : 1096-987X (Electronic) (2008).
179.   ROWE, C. L., WAGSTAFF, K. M., O KSAYAN, S., G LOVER, D. J., JANS, D. A. & M OSELEY,
       G. W. Nuclear Trafficking of the Rabies Virus Interferon Antagonist P-Protein Is Regulated
       by an Importin-Binding Nuclear Localization Sequence in the C-Terminal Domain. eng.
       PloS one 11, e0150477. ISSN : 1932-6203 (Electronic) (2016).
180.   RUBINSTEIN, M. & C OLBY, R. H. M_Rubinstein,_Ralph_H_Colby,_Polymer.pdf 2003.
181.   RYAN, V. H., D IGNON, G. L., Z ERZE, H. & B URKE, K. A. Mechanistic View of hnRNPA2
       Low-Complexity Domain Structure , Interactions , and Phase Separation Altered by Mu-
       tation and Arginine Methylation Article Mechanistic View of hnRNPA2 Low-Complexity
       Domain Structure , Interactions , and Phase Separation Altered by Mutation and Arginine
       Methylation, 465-479 (2018).
182.   S ALEH, O. A., J EON, B.-j. & L IEDL, T. Enzymatic degradation of liquid droplets of DNA
       is modulated near the phase boundary. 117 (2020).
183.   S ALMON, L., N ODET, G., O ZENNE, V., Y IN, G., J ENSEN, M. R., Z WECKSTETTER, M.
       & B LACKLEDGE, M. NMR characterization of long-range order in intrinsically disordered
       proteins. eng. Journal of the American Chemical Society 132, 8407-8418. ISSN : 1520-5126
       (Electronic) (2010).
184.   S ALVI, N., A BYZOV, A. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Analytical Description of NMR Relaxation
       Highlights Correlated Dynamics in Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. Angewandte Chemie
       - International Edition 56, 14020-14024. ISSN : 15213773 (2017).
185.   S ANDERS, D. W., K EDERSHA, N., L EE, D. S., S TROM, A. R., D RAKE, V., R IBACK, J. A.,
       B RACHA, D., E EFTENS, J. M., I WANICKI, A., WANG, A., W EI, M. T., W HITNEY, G.,
       LYONS, S. M., A NDERSON, P., JACOBS, W. M., I VANOV, P. & B RANGWYNNE, C. P. Com-
       peting Protein-RNA Interaction Networks Control Multiphase Intracellular Organization.
       Cell 181, 306-324.e28. ISSN : 10974172. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.
       03.050 (2020).
186.   S ATO, H., M ASUDA, M., K ANAI, M., T SUKIYAMA -KOHARA, K., YONEDA, M. & K AI,
       C. Measles Virus N Protein Inhibits Host Translation by Binding to eIF3-p40. Journal of
       Virology 81, 11569-11576. ISSN : 0022-538X (2007).
187.   S ATO, H., M ASUDA, M., M IURA, R., YONEDA, M. & K AI, C. Morbillivirus nucleopro-
       tein possesses a novel nuclear localization signal and a CRM1-independent nuclear export
       signal. eng. Virology 352, 121-130. ISSN : 0042-6822 (Print) (2006).




                                                132


                                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHIE

188.   S AVASTANO, M. C., G AMBINI, G., S AVASTANO, A., FALSINI, B., D E V ICO, U., S ANGUINETTI,
       M., C ATTANI, P., M ARCHETTI, S., L ARICI, A. R., F RANCESCHI, F., S ANTOLIQUIDO, A.,
       M ORONI, R., C AMBIERI, A., B ELLANTONE, R., L ANDI, F., S CAMBIA, G. & R IZZO, S.
       Evidence-based of conjunctival COVID-19 positivity : An Italian experience : Gemelli
       Against COVID Group. eng. European journal of ophthalmology, 1120672120976548.
       ISSN : 1724-6016 (Electronic) (2020).

189.   S CHNEIDER, R., M AURIN, D., C OMMUNIE, G., K RAGELJ, J., H ANSEN, D. F., RUIGROK,
       R. W., J ENSEN, M. R. & B LACKLEDGE, M. Visualizing the molecular recognition trajec-
       tory of an intrinsically disordered protein using multinuclear relaxation dispersion NMR.
       Journal of the American Chemical Society 137, 1220-1229. ISSN : 15205126 (2015).
190.   S CHUL, W., G ROENHOUT, B., KOBERNA, K., TAKAGAKI, Y., J ENNY, A., M ANDERS,
       E. M., R AŠKA, I., VAN D RIEL, R. & D E J ONG, L. The RNA 3 cleavage factors CstF
       64 kDa and CPSF 100 kDa are concentrated in nuclear domains closely associated with
       coiled bodies and newly synthesized RNA. EMBO Journal 15, 2883-2892. ISSN : 02614189
       (1996).
191.   S CHWALBE, M., O ZENNE, V., B IBOW, S., JAREMKO, M., JAREMKO, L., G AJDA, M.,
       J ENSEN, M. R., B IERNAT, J., B ECKER, S., M ANDELKOW, E., Z WECKSTETTER, M. &
       B LACKLEDGE, M. Predictive atomic resolution descriptions of intrinsically disordered
       hTau40 and α-synuclein in solution from NMR and small angle scattering. Structure 22,
       238-249. ISSN : 09692126 (2014).
192.   S HIN, Y. & B RANGWYNNE, C. P. Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and di-
       sease. Science 357. ISSN : 10959203 (2017).
193.   S INGATULINA, A. S., H AMON, L., S UKHANOVA, M. V., B OUHSS, A., L AVRIK, O. I.
       & PASTRE, D. PARP-1 Activation Directs FUS to DNA Damage Sites to Form PARG-
       Reversible Compartments Enriched in Damaged DNA Article PARP-1 Activation Directs
       FUS to DNA Damage Sites to Form PARG-Reversible Compartments Enriched in Dama-
       ged DNA, 1809-1821 (2019).
194.   S MALLWOOD, S., RYAN, K. W. & M OYER, S. A. Deletion analysis defines a carboxyl-
       proximal region of Sendai virus P protein that binds to the polymerase L protein. 202,
       154-163. ISSN : 00426822 (1994).
195.   S PERA, S. & BAX, A. Empirical Correlation between Protein Backbone Conformation and
       Cα and Cβ 13C Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Chemical Shifts. Journal of the American
       Chemical Society 113, 5490-5492. ISSN : 15205126 (1991).
196.   S PRAGUE, B. L., P EGO, R. L., S TAVREVA, D. A. & M C NALLY, J. G. Analysis of binding
       reactions by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. Biophysical Journal 86, 3473-
       3495. ISSN : 00063495. http://dx.doi.org/10.1529/biophysj.103.026765 (2004).
197.   S UGAI, A., S ATO, H., H AGIWARA, K., KOZUKA -H ATA, H., OYAMA, M., YONEDA, M.
       & K AI, C. Newly Identified Minor Phosphorylation Site Threonine-279 of Measles Virus
       Nucleoprotein Is a Prerequisite for Nucleocapsid Formation. Journal of Virology 88, 1140-
       1149. ISSN : 0022-538X (2014).
198.   S UGAI, A., S ATO, H., YONEDA, M. & K AI, C. Phosphorylation of measles virus phospho-
       protein at S86 and/or S151 downregulates viral transcriptional activity. FEBS Letters 586,
       3900-3907. ISSN : 00145793. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2012.09.021
       (2012).
199.   S UGAI, A., S ATO, H., YONEDA, M. & K AI, C. PIM 3 kinase, a proto-oncogene product,
       regulates phosphorylation of the measles virus nucleoprotein tail domain at Ser 479 and
       Ser 510. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 531, 267-274. ISSN :
       10902104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.06.002 (2020).


                                              133


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

200.   TATSUO, H., O NO, N., TANAKA, K. & YANAGI, Y. Slam (CDw150) is a cellular receptor
       for measles virus. Nature 406, 893-897. ISSN : 00280836 (2000).
201.   TAYLOR, N. O., W EI, M. T., S TONE, H. A. & B RANGWYNNE, C. P. Quantifying Dyna-
       mics in Phase-Separated Condensates Using Fluorescence Recovery after Photobleaching.
       Biophysical Journal 117, 1285-1300. ISSN : 15420086. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
       bpj.2019.08.030 (2019).
202.   T ROS, M., Z HENG, L., H UNGER, J., B ONN, M., B ONN, D., S MITS, G. J. & W OUTERSEN,
       S. Picosecond orientational dynamics of water in living cells. Nature Communications 8,
       1-7. ISSN : 20411723. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00858-0 (2017).
203.   T SANG, B., P RITIŠANAC, I., S CHERER, S. W., M OSES, A. M. & F ORMAN -K AY, J. D.
       Phase Separation as a Missing Mechanism for Interpretation of Disease Mutations. Cell
       183, 1742-1756. ISSN : 0092-8674. https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science /
       article/pii/S0092867420316226 (2020).
204.   T URNER, A. L., WATSON, M., W ILKINS, O. G., C ATO, L., T RAVERS, A., T HOMAS, J. O.
       & S TOTT, K. Highly disordered histone H1 DNA model complexes and their condensates.
       115 (2018).
205.   U RRY, D. W. Free energy transduction in polypeptides and proteins based on inverse tempe-
       rature transitions. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 57, 23-57. ISSN : 00796107
       (1992).
206.   VALLURUPALLI, P., B OUVIGNIES, G. & K AY, L. E. Studying "invisible" excited protein
       states in slow exchange with a major state conformation. Journal of the American Chemical
       Society 134, 8148-8161. ISSN : 00027863 (2012).
207.   VAN D ER L EE, R., B ULJAN, M., L ANG, B., W EATHERITT, R. J., DAUGHDRILL, G. W.,
       D UNKER, A. K., F UXREITER, M., G OUGH, J., G SPONER, J., J ONES, D. T., K IM, P. M.,
       K RIWACKI, R. W., O LDFIELD, C. J., PAPPU, R. V., T OMPA, P., U VERSKY, V. N., W RIGHT,
       P. E. & BABU, M. M. Classification of intrinsically disordered regions and proteins. Che-
       mical Reviews 114, 6589-6631. ISSN : 15206890 (2014).
208.   WANG, J., C HOI, J. M., H OLEHOUSE, A. S., L EE, H. O., Z HANG, X., JAHNEL, M., M AHARANA,
       S., L EMAITRE, R., P OZNIAKOVSKY, A., D RECHSEL, D., P OSER, I., PAPPU, R. V., A LBERTI,
       S. & H YMAN, A. A. A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Sepa-
       ration of Prion-like RNA Binding Proteins. Cell 174, 688-699.e16. ISSN : 10974172 (2018).
209.   WANG, Z., Z HANG, G. & Z HANG, H. Protocol for analyzing protein liquid–liquid phase
       separation. Biophysics Reports 5, 1-9. ISSN : 2364-3439. https://doi.org/10.1007/
       s41048-018-0078-7 (2019).
210.   WAUDBY, C. A., M ANTLE, M. D., C ABRITA, L. D., G LADDEN, L. F., D OBSON, C. M. &
       C HRISTODOULOU, J. Rapid Distinction of Intracellular and Extracellular Proteins Using
       NMR Diffusion Measurements. Journal of the American Chemical Society 134, 11312-
       11315. ISSN : 0002-7863. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja304912c (2012).
211.   WAUDBY, C. A., O UVRY, M., DAVIS, B. & C HRISTODOULOU, J. Two-dimensional NMR
       lineshape analysis of single, multiple, zero and double quantum correlation experiments.
       Journal of Biomolecular NMR 74, 95-109. ISSN : 15735001. https : / / doi . org / 10 .
       1007/s10858-019-00297-7 (2020).
212.   W EI, M.-T., E LBAUM -G ARFINKLE, S., H OLEHOUSE, A. S., C HEN, C. C.-H., F ERIC, M.,
       A RNOLD, C. B., P RIESTLEY, R. D., PAPPU, R. V. & B RANGWYNNE, C. P. Phase behaviour
       of disordered proteins underlying low density and high permeability of liquid organelles.
       eng. Nature chemistry 9, 1118-1125. ISSN : 1755-4349 (Electronic) (2017).




                                              134


                                                                             BIBLIOGRAPHIE

213.   W EICKERT, S., C ATTANI, J. & D RESCHER, M. Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs)
       studied by EPR and in-cell EPR 1-37. ISBN : 978-1-78801-372-7. http://dx.doi.org/
       10.1039/9781788013888-00001 (The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2019).
214.   W HITE, M. R., M ITREA, D. M., Z HANG, P., T OLBERT, M., TAYLOR, J. P., K RIWACKI,
       R. W., W HITE, M. R., M ITREA, D. M., Z HANG, P., S TANLEY, C. B., C ASSIDY, D. E.,
       N OURSE, A., P HILLIPS, A. H., T OLBERT, M., TAYLOR, J. P. & K RIWACKI, R. W. C9orf72
       Poly ( PR ) Dipeptide Repeats Disturb Biomolecular Phase Separation and Disrupt Nucleo-
       lar Function C9orf72 Poly ( PR ) Dipeptide Repeats Disturb Biomolecular Phase Separa-
       tion and Disrupt Nucleolar Function. Molecular Cell 74, 713-728.e6. ISSN : 1097-2765.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.03.019 (2019).
215.   WHO. Global Measles and Rubella Update. World Health Organisation, www.who.int/immunization/diseases/measles/
       (2019).
216.   W ILKINS, M. R., G ASTEIGER, E., BAIROCH, A., S ANCHEZ, J. C., W ILLIAMS, K. L.,
       A PPEL, R. D. & H OCHSTRASSER, D. F. Protein identification and analysis tools in the
       ExPASy server. eng. Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.) 112, 531-552. ISSN :
       1064-3745 (Print) (1999).
217.   W ILLIAMSON, M. P. Using chemical shift perturbation to characterise ligand binding. Pro-
       gress in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy 73, 1-16. ISSN : 00796565. http :
       //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnmrs.2013.02.001 (2013).
218.   W ONG, L. E., B HATT, A., E RDMANN, P. S., H OU, Z., M AIER, J., P IRKULIYEVA, S.,
       E NGELKE, M., B ECKER, S., P LITZKO, J., W IENANDS, J. & G RIESINGER, C. Tripartite
       phase separation of two signal effectors with vesicles priming B cell responsiveness. Na-
       ture Communications 11, 848. ISSN : 2041-1723. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
       020-14544-1 (2020).
219.   W ORD, J. M., L OVELL, S. C., R ICHARDSON, J. S. & R ICHARDSON, D. C. Asparagine and
       glutamine : using hydrogen atom contacts in the choice of side-chain amide orientation.
       eng. Journal of molecular biology 285, 1735-1747. ISSN : 0022-2836 (Print) (1999).
220.   W RIGHT, P. & DYSON, H. Intrinsically unstructured proteins : re-assessing the protein
       structure-function paradigm. Journal of molecular biology 293 2, 321-31 (1999).
221.   W RIGHT, P. E. & DYSON, H. J. Intrinsically disordered proteins in cellular signalling
       and regulation. eng. Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology 16, 18-29. ISSN : 1471-0080.
       https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25531225%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
       gov/pmc/articles/PMC4405151/ (2015).
222.   YABUKARSKI, F., L AWRENCE, P., TARBOURIECH, N., B OURHIS, J. M., D ELAFORGE,
       E., J ENSEN, M. R., RUIGROK, R. W., B LACKLEDGE, M., VOLCHKOV, V. & JAMIN, M.
       Structure of Nipah virus unassembled nucleoprotein in complex with its viral chaperone.
       Nature Structural and Molecular Biology 21, 754-759. ISSN : 15459985. http://dx.doi.
       org/10.1038/nsmb.2868 (2014).
223.   YANG, P., M ATHIEU, C., KOLAITIS, R.-M., Z HANG, P., M ESSING, J., Y URTSEVER, U.,
       YANG, Z., W U, J., L I, Y., PAN, Q., Y U, J., M ARTIN, E. W., M ITTAG, T., K IM, H. J. &
       TAYLOR, J. P. G3BP1 Is a Tunable Switch that Triggers Phase Separation to Assemble
       Stress Granules. Cell 181, 325-345.e28. ISSN : 0092-8674. https://www.sciencedirect.
       com/science/article/pii/S0092867420303391 (2020).
224.   Z ASLAVSKY, B., BAGIROV, T., B OROVSKAYA, A., G ULAEVA, N., M IHEEVA, L., M AHMUDOV,
       A. & RODNIKOVA, M. Structure of water as a key factor of phase separation in aqueous
       mixtures of two nonionic polymers. Polymer 30, 2104-2111. ISSN : 0032-3861. https :
       //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0032386189903017 (1989).



                                              135


BIBLIOGRAPHIE

225.   Z HANG, H., N EAL, S. & W ISHART, D. S. RefDB : A database of uniformly referenced
       protein chemical shifts. Journal of Biomolecular NMR 25, 173-195. ISSN : 1573-5001.
       https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022836027055 (2003).
226.   Z HANG, S., C HEN, L., Z HANG, G., YAN, Q., YANG, X., D ING, B., TANG, Q., S UN, S.,
       H U, Z. & C HEN, M. An Amino Acid of Human Parainfluenza Virus Type 3 Nucleoprotein
       Is Critical for Template Function and Cytoplasmic Inclusion Body Formation. Journal of
       Virology 87, 12457-12470. ISSN : 0022-538X (2013).
227.   Z HOU, Y., S U, J. M., S AMUEL, C. E. & M A, D. Measles Virus Forms Inclusion Bodies
       with Properties of Liquid Organelles. Journal of Virology 93. ISSN : 0022-538X (2019).




                                            136




                                                               Table des figures


1.1  Differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy image of phase separation of
     biopolymers [133]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      3
1.2 Schematic illustration of the on-lattice model of mixing process. The mixture of
     two components: polymers (black) and solvent (grey) is shown. . . . . . . . . . .         4
1.3 Phase diagran with an upper or lower critical solution temperature (UCST or
     LCST, respectively) [133]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5
1.4 Network-based classification of the droplet components. Valence (v) of the bio-
     condensate member: v = 0 (bystander), v = 1 (cap) ; v = 2 (bridge), v>2 (node)
     [185]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
1.5 (a) An example of parallel binding site connection [58] ; (b) sequential binding site
     connection [87]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
1.6 (a) Types of molecular interactions underlying intracellular phase transitions [159] ;
     (b) possible amino acid contacts which stabilise phase separation [116]. . . . . .        7
1.7 Water classification in the solution. Hydration and bulk water around the solute
     [174]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
1.8 Structure of viral genome. Linear negative sense single-strand RNA starts with a
     leader sequence on the 3’-end, followed by protein genes and terminated with a
     trailer sequence on 5’-end. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10
1.9 The structure of MeV virion (left) and the schematic representation of viral life
     cycle (rigth). MeV genome together with N form a helical nucleocapsid (NC) that
     is associated with L and P proteins. H and F proteins are incorporated into the li-
     pid envelope that is derived from the host cell membrane. M protein interacts with
     both the NC and the cytoplasmic tails of F, and promotes virion assembly. MeV
     viral life cycle: Following the binding of the H protein to the host receptor and
     membrane fusion with the help of F, viral NC releases into the host cytoplasm. Re-
     plication and transcription of the viral genome take place in the cytoplasm. Newly
     synthesized NC and other viral proteins are transported to the plasma membrane.
     M protein interacts with NC, the cytoplasmic tails of the H protein and the F pro-
     tein, the cell membrane and actin filaments what promote virus assembly [177]. .         11
1.10 (a) A schematic representation of the structure of MeV P protein. Bars corresponds
     to structural regions, lines to disordered regions ; (b) crystal structure of MeV te-
     tramerisation domain (PDB 3ZDO) ; (c) crystal structure of a complex between
     the linear helical motif of Ntail and the XD of P (PDB 1T6O) ; (d) a comparison
     of P structures from different viruses. Bars corresponds to structural regions, lines
     to disordered regions, "-" indicates acidic region in Ptail . (e) Localization of se-
     condary structure propensity and representation of flexibility/rigidity of Ptail with
     colors from red (flexible) to blue (rigid) and the transient α-helices from the N-
     terminal helix (α1 to α4). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     12
1.11 (a) A schematic representation of the structure of MeV L protein. (b) The compa-
     rison of L protein structure of PIV5 and VSV. PIV5 structure corresponds to the
     transcription mode, VSV - to the replication mode [1]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       14


                                            138


                                                                                Table des figures

1.12 (a) A schematic representation of the structure of MeV N protein. (b) MeV NC
     structure solved by Cryo-EM (PDB 4UFT), alternating colors correspond to dif-
     ferent copies of N ; (c) the structure of N0 P (PDB number 4CO6) Narm (left) and
     the C-arm (right) are shown with the dash, the region of P is shown in red. . . . .       15
1.13 Structure of the 5 viral genomic RNA (HO-ACCAGA-OH) inside the NC. (a) The
     Cryo-EM electrostatic potential of the six bases at the 5 end of the viral RNA
     inside the NC (EM data base EMD-0142) which forms A-helix with a turn every
     three nb. (b) RNA is squeezed between the two halves of N. The figure shows
     some of the residues binding the RNA, in red those that bind the bases [82]. . . .        16
1.14 Kinetics of the assembly of NC and methods to follow it: NMR, fluorescence and
     EM. When RNA was added to the N0 P complex, NC assembly could be followed
     by NMR in real time because the NMR signals for the P peptide appear over
     time, by fluorescence anisotropy using fluorescein amidite-labeled RNAs, and by
     negative staining EM showing the nucleocapsids [82]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          18
1.15 N : P interactome. (a) A schematic illustration of interactions between P (red) and
     N (blue) regions. Folded domains are shown with red and blue color, regions with
     a transient structure that folds upon binding to the partner are shown with light
     red and blue, IDRs are not colored. (b) Structure of different P:N complexes (PDB
     3ZDO, IT6O, 4CO6), three interactions are highlighted. . . . . . . . . . . . . .          19
1.16 MeV biocondensates exhibit liquid properties in cellulo [227]. (a) N and P co-
     localisation ; (b) fusion between two droplets ; (c) an example of FRAP experiment
     of MeV droplets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
1.17 An illustration of possible roles of viral factories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   22
1.18 Free energy landscapes of structured proteins characterized by a stable three-
     dimensional structure are dominated by a single deep funnel. Disordered proteins
     are characterized by shallow energy landscapes with several local minima of com-
     parable free energy, separated by low barriers allowing fast interconversion kine-
     tics between conformations [170]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       24
1.19 A continuum of protein structures from fully folded protein to disordered [203]. .        24
1.20 Diagram-of-states to classify predicted conformational properties of IDPs [207].          26

2.1   Schematic representation of the samplings of J(ω) by three relaxation parameters.
      Adapted from [Peng:1991] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       37
2.2   (a) Rex transverse relaxation rate. (b) Resonance offset for two-site chemical ex-
      change constants [153]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    40
2.3   Chemical exchange regimes ranked by the comparison between kex and ∆ω cause
      different types of resonance in exchange between two states (A and B). NMR
      methods for characterizing the minor states in exchange with a visible species at
      different timescales with a rough range of timescales over which they can be ap-
      plied. In the slow exchange regime, two separate peaks correspond to states A and
      B, although in practice state B may be invisible due to a low signal/noise ratio.
      In the fast exchange regime, a single peak is observed with a population-averaged
      chemical shift and apparent R2 . In the intermediate exchange regime, the peaks
      undergo extreme chemical shift broadening, and the apparent R2 is greatly en-
      hanced due to Rex . The three methods shown toward the right (PRE, lifetime line
      broadening (Rllb), and DEST) are used to visualize a minor state with a greatly
      enhanced R2 compared with the major state. The other methods shown, toward the
      left, depend on either a difference in chemical shift between states A and B (rota-
      ting frame relaxation dispersion (R1ρ ), CPMG relaxation dispersion, and CEST)
      or a difference in rates of hydrogen exchange [11]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      41


                                             139


Table des figures

   2.4   Light and fluorescent microscopy provides information about droplets number,
         size and morphology (top panel). The phase diagram indicates regions of environ-
         mental conditions with single and double phase. Phase diagram can be done as a
         function of various parameters (lower panel) [68]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         44
   2.5   Droplets surface tension determination. Right angle imaging technique measures
         the height and the radius of droplet from which surface tension can be obtained.
         Surface wetting technique provides surface tension value from the contact angle
         of the droplet. This requires information about the hydrophobicity of the surface
         [68]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      44
   2.6   Fluorescence microscopy provides a source to determine molecular distribution
         in droplets. Protein co-localisation or demixing can be determined, also several
         phase co-existence can be imaged [68]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           45
   2.7   Illustration of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching principle (top panel).
         Protein exchange between phases can be studied by bleaching an entire droplet,
         protein diffusion inside droplet can be measured by bleaching a small region inside
         droplet (middle panel). Fluorescence recovery profile representing fast (solid line)
         and slow diffusion cases (long dashed line), the case with a small mobile fraction
         is illustrated with short dashed line [68]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47
   2.8   Schematic illustration of the droplets probe-size-dependent permeability [212]. .            48

   3.1   Fitting of the thermodynamic models. (a) 1 step model, (b) 2 step model, (c) 3 step
         model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       73
   3.2   FRAP profile of fluorescently labelled P50 N525 in droplets formed with (red) P304-507 ,
         (grey) P304-507 VLK->AAA, (black) P304-507 VLK->AAA and Ploop . . . . . . . . . 74
   3.3   Ploop interaction with importin α5. (a) Intensity ratio of peaks on an HSQC spectra
         between Ploop and Ploop with importin α5 at 1:1 ratio (100 µM). (b) R1ρ profile of
         Ploop and Ploop with importin α5 at 1:1 ratio (100 µM). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          75
   3.4   Fluorescence microscopy imaging of P50 N525 :P304-507 droplets with (a) importin
         α5-FAM, (b) YFP. Fluorescent proteins were added into pre-formed droplets. . .               75
   3.5   Kinetics of fluorescence anisotropy of RNA-FAM after addition of P50 N525 and
         P304 N525 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      76

   4.1   Regions of Ptail which are known or predicated to be phosphorylated. Acidic amino
         acids are shown in red. ? indicates phosphorylation sites (S86 and S151) [43]. +
         indicates amino acids predicted to be phosphorylated by CK2. . . . . . . . . . .             80
   4.2   1H-15 N    HSQC spectra of Ptail non-phosphorylated (red) and phosphorylated (yel-
         low).      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   81
   4.3   1 H-15 N   HSQC spectra of Ptail phosphorylated amino acids at different time points.        81
   4.4   1 H-15 N   HSQC spectra of Ptail phosphorylated amino acids at different time points.        82
   4.5   Kinetics of RNA-FAM fluorescence anisotropy for P50 N525 , P304 N525 , phosphory-
         lated P304 N525 and P304 N525 with a mutation of HELL motive. . . . . . . . . . .            83
   4.6   NS imaging of phosphorylated P304 N525 assembled with polyA RNA. . . . . . .                 83
   4.7   RNA-FAM fluorescence anisotropy kinetics comparison at law NaCl concentra-
         tion (75 mM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         84
   4.8   Kinetics of RNA-FAM fluorescence anisotropy for P304 N525 and P304 N525 HELL-
         >AAA and low and high salt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          84
   4.9   NS microscopy of P304 N405 (a) at 75 mM NaCl, (b) phosphorylated at NaCl 150
         mM, (c) phosphorylated at NaCl 75 mM. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            84


                                                   140


                                                                                 Table des figures

4.10 (a) HSQC spectra of P304 N525 before assembly (red) and after (yellow) at 75 mM
     NaCl triggered with polyA RNA. (b) Kinetics of extracted peak intensities during
     the assembly. They were fitted with exponentional curve. (c) Histogram distribu-
     tion of assembly rates obtained by fitting individual peak intensities kinetics. . . .       85
4.11 Intensity of peaks of P304 before and after P304 N525 assembly. . . . . . . . . . .          85
4.12 HSQC spectra of (a) P304 N525 phosphorylation and (b) P304 N405 in comparison
     with P304 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      86
4.13 HSQC spectra of (a) P304 N525 phosphorylation and (b) P304 N405 in comparison
     with P304 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      87
4.14 Intensity of peaks of P304 during the assembly. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          87
4.15 Relaxation profiles (a) R1 , (b) R1ρ and (c) het-NOE for Ptail with and without
     phosphorylation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         88
4.16 Relaxation profiles (a) R1 , (b) R1ρ and (c) het-NOE for Ptail with and without
     phosphorylation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         88
4.17 NS imaging of Ncore T279E after TEV cleavage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            89
4.18 Structure of N0 P complex. T279 is shown in yellow, P in red, Ncore in blue. . . .           89

5.1    The dependency of S2τC on a protein concentration in the sample. Values are taken
       from Table S1 [21] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       95
5.2    Ntail phase separation. (a) After incubation solution separates into two phases: Ntail
       condensed and dilute ; (b) Fluorescent microscopy imaging of a colloid system
       where Ntail is labelled with FAM ; (c) FRAP of Ntail ; (d) Ntail amino acid sequence.     97
5.3    IR absorption spectra, condensed phase spectra are in black . . . . . . . . . . .         98
5.4    1H NMR spectra of (a) condensed solution, (b) in the presences of 75 mg/ml PEG.           98
5.5    Ntail phase diagram as a dependency on temperature. Different colors correspond
       to different salt concentrations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    99
5.6    Fluorescent microscopy images of Ntail droplets taken at different NaCl concen-
       trations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    99
5.7    The results of Flory-Huggins model fit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       100
5.8    1 H-15 N HSQC spectra of N
                                      tail recorded using 3 mm normal tube (a, red) and Shi-
       gemi (b, cyan), Ntail spectra in a dilute state is shown in blue on both (a) and (b) ;
       (c) image of a Shigemi tube with a droplet sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         102
5.9    Integral of 1D 1 H spectra signal intensity of Ntail droplet sample as a function of
       z-gradient strength. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    102
5.10   Secondary chemical shift (a) 1 H, (b) CO, (c) 15 N, (d) Cα. Black corresponds to
       Ntail in dilute state, red to Ntail in condensed phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   103
5.11   Experimental relaxation rates of Ntail in a dilute state. Red plots correspond to
       measurements at 600 MHz, blue - 850 MHz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          104
5.12   Water relaxation rates in the presance of 0, 37.5 mg/ml and 75 mg/ml PEG and
       300 µM Ntail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    104
5.13   Extracted parameters of backbone motions. (a) Intermediate correlation times, (b)
       slow correlation times, (c) amplitudes of motions for all three correlation times. .      105
5.14   Fits of experimental spin relaxation values. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      105
5.15   Experimental relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state. Red plots correspond
       to measurements of dilute Ntail at 600 MHz, blue - dilute Ntail at 850 MHz, black-
       grey to condenced dilute Ntail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    106
5.16   Fitted relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    107
5.17   Fitted relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    107
5.18   Fitted relaxation rates of Ntail in a condensed state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    109
5.19   Ramachandran plots for (a) dilute, (b) 40 mM Ntail boxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . .       109


                                              141


Table des figures

   5.20 The comparison of long-range characteristics. (right) Rg , (left) end-to-end distance
        for Ntail dilute (grey) and 40 mM box (blue). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110

   6.1   Structure of SARS-CoV-2 N protein. (a) Domain architecture of the SARS-CoV-2
         N protein. Two folded domains: RNA binding domain and dimerization domain.
         And three disordered: N-terminal domain (NTD), link and C-terminal domain
         (CTD). (b) Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA binding domain (PBD: 6YI3). Cen-
         ter and left: coloured based on surface potential. Right: ribbon structure with N-
         and C-termini highlighted with spheres. (c) Dimer structure of the SARS-CoV-2
         dimerization domain (PDB: 6YUN). Center and left: coloured based on surface
         potential. Right: ribbon structure, yellow and purple for separate monomers, with
         N- and C-termini highlighted with spheres. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
   6.2   DIC microscopy of SARS-COV-2 N. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116




                                             142




                                                           Liste des tableaux


5.1   Fitted parameters for each salt concentration and corresponding critical temperature.100
5.2   Energy of mixing: entropic, interacting and total. Energies are in kcal mol-1. . . 100




                                           144


                                                                       LISTE DES TABLEAUX




                                                                          Publications



    Guseva S, Perez LM, Camacho-Zarco A, Bessa LM, Salvi N, Malki A, Maurin D, Blackledge
M. 1H, 13C and 15N Backbone chemical shift assignments of the n-terminal and central intrin-
sically disordered domains of SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein. Biomol NMR Assign. (2021) 17:1–6.


    Salvi N, Bessa LM, Guseva S, Camacho-Zarco A, Maurin D, Perez LM, Malki A, Hengesbach
M, Korn SM, Schlundt A, Schwalbe H, Blackledge M. 1H, 13C and 15N backbone chemical shift
assignments of SARS-CoV-2 nsp3a. Biomol NMR Assign. (2021) 15(1):173-176.

     Altincekic, Korn, Qureshi, Dujardin, Ninot-Pedrosa, Abele, Abi Saad, Alfano, Almeida, Al-
shamleh, Cardoso de Amorim, Anderson, Ano Bom, Anorma, Bains, Bax, Blackledge, Blechar,
Böckmann, Brigandat, Bula et al. Large-scale recombinant production of the SARS-CoV-2 pro-
teome for high-throughput and structural biology applications. Front. Mol. Biosci. (2021) Accep-
ted.

    Guseva S, Milles S, Jensen MR, Schoehn G, Ruigrok RW, Blackledge M, Structure, dynamics
and phase separation of measles virus RNA replication machinery. Curr Opin Virol. (2020) 41:59-
67.

   Guseva S, Milles S, Jensen MR, Salvi N, Kleman J-P, Maurin D, Ruigrok RW, Blackledge M.
Measles virus nucleo- and phosphoproteins form liquid-like phase-separated compartments that
promote nucleocapsid assembly. Sci. Adv. (2020) 6:eaaz7095.

  Guseva S, Milles S, Blackledge M, Ruigrok RW. The Nucleoprotein and Phosphoprotein of
Measles Virus. Frontiers in Microbiol. (2019) 10:1832.

    Desfosses A, Milles S, Jensen MR, Guseva S, Colletier J-P, Maurin D, Schoehn G, Gutsche
I, Ruigrok R. WH, Blackledge M. Assembly and Cryo-EM structures of RNA-specific measles
virus nucleocapsids provide mechanistic insight into paramyxoviral replication, Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA (2019) 116:4256–4264.

    Milles S, Jensen MR, Lazert C, Guseva S, Ivashchenko S, Communie G, Maurin D, Gerlier
D, Ruigrok RW, Blackledge M. An ultraweak interaction in the intrinsically disordered replication
machinery is essential for measles virus function. Sci Adv. (2018) 4:eaat7778.




                                              145




                                        A
  Annexe 1: Supporting information to the article
"Measles Virus Nucleo- and Phosphoproteins form
     Liquid-like Phase-Separated Compartments"




                       147


                      advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/6/14/eaaz7095/DC1


                                 Supplementary Materials for

    Measles virus nucleo- and phosphoproteins form liquid-like phase-separated
                compartments that promote nucleocapsid assembly

           Serafima Guseva, Sigrid Milles, Malene Ringkjøbing Jensen, Nicola Salvi, Jean-Philippe Kleman,
                             Damien Maurin, Rob W. H. Ruigrok*, Martin Blackledge*

           *Corresponding author. Email: martin.blackledge@ibs.fr (M.B.); rob.ruigrok@ibs.fr (R.W.H.R.)

                                Published 1 April 2020, Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz7095 (2020)
                                           DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aaz7095

The PDF file includes:

       Table S1
       Figs. S1 to S8
       Legends for movies S1 and S2
       Data S1

Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:

(available at advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/6/14/eaaz7095/DC1)

       Movie S1 and S2


Table S1


 Ptot (M)           Ntot (M)           PD (M)            ND (M)            ratio

                75                 7,5              43,23               5,77               0,13

                75                 15               54,60               8,64               0,16

                75               37,5                72,3              13,49               0,19

                75                 75                 75               26,74               0,36



Calculated ratio of [N]/[P] in liquid droplets as determined from NMR (see main text)




Fig. S1 SDS-PAGE (15%) with Coomassie staining of purified truncated constructs of P and P1-
507.


Fig. S2

Fluorescent images overlaid with DIC show the salt dependence of LLPS formation. P50N525
(100 µM, 1% fluorescently labelled) and P304-507 (100 µM) were used, NaCl concentration in
buffer was increased linearly from 25 mM to 400 mM.


Fig. S3

Fluorescence image of a droplet formed by P50N525 (25 µM, 0.04% labelled) and P304-507 (50 µM)
and its intensity profile represent homogeneous protein distribution within the droplet.




Fig. S4. Secondary structural propensity of PLOOP

Population of -helical secondary structure of PLOOP showing 15% and 10% difference between
the statistical coil ensemble (black line) and the selected ensemble using ASTEROIDS (red bars)
for regions 405-411 and 433-438 respectively.


Fig. S5. Dynamic behaviour of PLOOP
15
     N R1 of PLOOP (concentration 500µM), PXD (concentration 500µM), P377-507 (concentration 100
µM) and P304-507 (concentration 100 µM) measured at 25ºC, 1H frequency of 850MHz.
Information about the tetramerization domain is not available as resonances for this region are
not observable under these experimental conditions.


Fig. S6 PLOOP remains unfolded in the context of phase separating protein constructs
1
    H-15N HSQC spectrum of P304-507 (red) (298K, phosphate buffer, 150mM salt and pH 6.0, 240
μM, 200 increments, 20 scans) overlapped with PLOOP (orange, 100 μM, 200 increments, 20
scans) and PXD (blue, 100 μM, 400 increments, 16 scans), all spectra were recorded at 1H
frequency of 700 MHz.


Fig. S7 Sequence analysis of PLOOP

Measles virus phosphoprotein homologs were found using The Basic Local Alignment Search
Tool (BLAST) from the Swiss-Prot database, non-truncated sequences were chosen for further
analysis (110 sequences) and visualised using https://weblogo.berkeley.edu for residues 377-
460.


Fig. S8 NMR signals of both P50N525 and P304-507 at phase separating conditions exhibit similar
characteristics as for the same proteins in the dilute phase. R profiles at 25ºC 700 MHz for (A)
P304-507 alone (100 M, grey) and with P50N525 (10 M, salmon pink); (B) P50N525 alone (100
M, grey) and with P304-507 (10 M, blue) measured at 25ºC 850 MHz. Translational diffusion
for (C) P304-507 alone (75 M, grey) and with P50N525 (7.5 M salmon pink); (D) P50N525 alone
(75 M, grey) and with P304-507 (37.5 M, blue).


Movie S1.
Droplets formed by P50N525 (10 µM) and P304-507 (100 µM) highlighting examples of fusion upon
touching within several seconds. The video speed is accelerated by a factor of 2. Scale bar is 24
µM.

Movie S2.
Fluorescence microscopy images showing RNA diffusing into droplets pre-formed by mixing
P50N525 (20 µM) and P304-507 (80 µM). Concentration of RNA was 200 µM (with 10% labelled
RNA-FAM). RNA was added on one side of the coverslip and spontaneously diffused in the
sample, the time gap between images is 2 seconds. Scale bar is 240 µm.


Data S1. Chemical shift assignment of PLOOP
Phosphate buffer 50 mM, pH 6.0
NaCl 150 mM
DTT 2 mM
298K

        N                 H       CO          CA

378     110.825           8.547   173.598     45.1
379     120.357           8.075   176.122     55.6725
380     124.46            8.585   -           51.967
381     -                 -       176.947     63.866
382     116.607           8.56    174.73      53.2185
383     121.187           7.868   174.841     51.963
384     -                 -       177.501     63.791
385     112.628           8.307   174.57      62.221
386     125.898           7.931   177.289     52.525
387     120.012           8.261   176.157     54.3155
388     119.453           7.975   175.915     62.016
389     124.335           8.404   176.204     56.325
390     122.421           8.158   175.570     60.769
391     123.769           8.544   175.475     50.978
392     -                 -       176.839     63.799
393     118.767           8.237   176.206     54.675
394     121.208           7.801   176.957     54.8565
395     123.226           8.057   174.311     54.424
396     -                 -       176.76      62.97
397     121.527           8.27    176.414     61.1525
398     125.462           8.209   176.664     61.0285
399     113.247           8.508   -           45.27
400     120.772           8.211   175.369     56.342
401     121.18            8.484   176.527     54.325
402     116.791           8.308   174.497     59.009
403     110.679           8.52    -           45.643
404     120.718           8.015   176.277     56.2955
405     124.762           8.311   178.064     52.741
406     121.392           8.145   177.412     55.471
407     123.543           8.137   178.092     52.8755
408     119.372           8.186   176.854     56.8525
409     120.959           8.032   176.299     62.8285
410     124.725           8.154   177.172     55.149
411     122.084           8.115   176.176     56.105
412     123.781           8.196   174.404     54.235
413     -                 -       176.956     63.005
414     120.81            8.238   176.162     62.334
415     127.802           8.409   177.804     52.554
416     115.276           8.258   174.830     58.399
417     122.887           8.355   176.364     56.477
418     121.129           8.35    176.079     56.0555
419     123.42            8.248   177.496     55.307
420     120.78            8.343   176.515     56.2045


421   109.802   8.418   174.26    45.393
422   119.745   8.205   176.704   55.594
423   114.736   8.223   174.476   61.8445
424   120.912   8.501   175.683   53.414
425   108.94    8.403   174.228   53.7865
426   120.423   8.187   176.710   56.241
427   114.908   8.237   174.672   61.821
428   118.005   8.367   174.731   58.2235
429   118.119   8.451   174.817   58.525
430   122.69    8.385   177.03    56.721
431   109.341   8.398   174.29    45.52
432   119.83    8.141   176.09    55.967
433   123.153   8.263   177.379   55.401
434   122.777   8.158   177.498   55.2965
435   121.688   8.193   176.799   56.7215
436   120.792   8.358   176.455   57.0605
437   120.096   8.107   175.580   57.8815
438   121.372   8.069   175.441   55.6295
439   123.226   8.121   176.98    55.143
440   123.287   8.188   174.287   54.016
441   -         -       176.959   63.176
442   121.382   8.249   176.902   61.241
443   112.707   8.41    173.911   53.479
444   121.208   8.16    176.546   56.162
445   122.953   8.381   176.632   56.408
446   122.294   8.461   176.3     47.0785
447   117.099   8.336   174.536   58.301
448   117.699   8.32    174.152   58.23
449   125.997   8.287   177.706   52.516
450   119.024   8.046   176.698   62.557
451   112.3     8.384   173.454   53.363
452   120.551   8.035   175.076   57.809
453   125.899   8.014   173.687   59.259
454   -         -       176.44    62.95
455   120.785   8.452   176.577   54.386
456   113.322   8.066   174.994   61.418
457   111.182   8.317   -         44.798
458   -         -       177.126   63.412
459   123.569   8.419   177.996   52.58
460   114.92    8.183   174.749   58.295


                                      B
Annexe 2 : Large-Scale Recombinant Production
              of the SARS-CoV-2 Proteome for
       High-Throughput and Structural Biology
                                 Applications




                    159


                                                                                                                                                                                   ORIGINAL RESEARCH
                                                                                                                                                                                       published: XX 2021
                                                                                                                                                                          doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.653148
1                                                                                                                                                                                                                      58
2                                                                                                                                                                                                                      59
3                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
4                                                Edited by:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       61
5                  Qian Han, Hainan University, China                                                                                                                                                                  62
6                                            Reviewed by:                                                                                                                                                              63
7         David Douglas Boehr, Pennsylvania State University,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       64
8
                                                United States
                                              Luis G. Brieba,            Large-Scale Recombinant Production                                                                                                            65
9                    National Polytechnic Institute of Mexico                                                                                                                                                          66
10                                         (CINVESTAV), Mexico           of the SARS-CoV-2 Proteome for                                                                                                                67
11   Q9                                    *Correspondence:                                                                                                                                                            68
12                                 Anja Böckmann
                              a.bockmann@ibcp.fr
                                                                         High-Throughput and Structural                                                                                                                69
13                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
14   Q2
     Q3
                                  Harald Schwalbe
                    schwalbe@nmr.uni-frankfurt.de
                                                                         Biology Applications                                                                                                                          71
15                                                                                                                                                                                                                     72
     Q1                        Martin Hengesbach
16                hengesbach@nmr.uni-frankfurt.de                        Nadide Altincekic 1,2†, Sophie Marianne Korn 2,3†, Nusrat Shahin Qureshi 1,2†, Marie Dujardin 4†,                                             73
17                               Andreas Schlundt                        Martí Ninot-Pedrosa 4†, Rupert Abele 5, Marie Jose Abi Saad 6, Caterina Alfano 7,                                                             74
18                    schlundt@bio.uni-frankfurt.de                      Fabio C. L. Almeida 8,9, Islam Alshamleh 1,2, Gisele Cardoso de Amorim 8,10,                                                                  75
19        †
              These authors have contributed equally to this work        Thomas K. Anderson 11, Cristiane Ano Bom 8,12, Chelsea Anorma 13, Jasleen Kaur Bains 1,2,                                                     76
20                          ‡
                                      and share ﬁrst authorship
                                                                         Adriaan Bax 14, Martin Blackledge 15, Julius Blechar 1,2, Anja Böckmann 4*‡, Louis Brigandat 4,                                               77
                             These authors share last authorship
21                                                                       Anna Bula 16, Matthias Bütikofer 6, Aldo Camacho Zarco 15, Teresa Carlomagno 17,18,                                                           78
                                        Specialty section:
22                           This article was submitted to
                                                                         Icaro Putinhon Caruso 8,9,19, Betül Ceylan 1,2, Apirat Chaikuad 20,21, Feixia Chu 22, Laura Cole 4,                                           79
23                                       Structural Biology,             Marquise G. Crosby 23, Karthikeyan Dhamotharan 2,3, Isabella C. Felli 24,25, Jan Ferner 1,2,                                                  80
24                                  a section of the journal             Yanick Fleischmann 6, Marie-Laure Fogeron 4, Nikolaos K. Fourkiotis 26, Christin Fuks 1,                                                      81
25                      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences               Boris Fürtig 1,2, Angelo Gallo 26, Santosh L. Gande 1,2, Juan Atilio Gerez 6, Dhiman Ghosh 6,                                                 82
26                                                                       Francisco Gomes-Neto 8,27, Oksana Gorbatyuk 28, Seraﬁma Guseva 15, Carolin Hacker 29,                                                         83
27                               Received: 13 January 2021               Sabine Häfner 30, Bruno Hargittay 1,2, K. Henzler-Wildman 11, Jeffrey C. Hoch 28,                                                             84
28
                                Accepted: 04 February 2021               Katharina Hohmann 1,2, Marie T. Hutchison 1,2, Kristaps Jaudzems 16, Vanessa de Jesus 1,2,                                                    85
29
                                       Published: XX 2021
                                                                         Katarina Jovic 22, Janina Kaderli 6, Gints Kalniņš 31, Iveta Kaņepe 16, Robert N. Kirchdoerfer 11,                                         86
30
                                                       Citation:         John Kirkpatrick 17,18, Stefan Knapp 20,21, Robin Krishnathas 1,2, Felicitas Kutz 1,2,                                                        87
                  Altincekic N, Korn SM, Qureshi NS, Dujardin M,
                                                                         Susanne zur Lage 18, Roderick Lambertz 3, Andras Lang 30, Douglas Laurents 32,
31            Ninot-Pedrosa M, Abele R, Abi Saad MJ, Alfano C,                                                                                                                                                         88
                                                                         Lauriane Lecoq 4, Verena Linhard 1,2, Frank Löhr 2,33, Anas Malki 15,
32             Almeida FCL, Alshamleh I, Cardoso de Amorim G,                                                                                                                                                          89
          Anderson TK, Ano Bom C, Anorma C, Bains JK, Bax A,             Luiza Mamigonian Bessa 15, Rachel W. Martin 13,23, Tobias Matzel 1,2, Damien Maurin 15,
33                                                                                                                                                                                                                     90
              Blackledge M, Blechar J, Böckmann A, Brigandat L,          Seth W. McNutt 22, Nathane Cunha Mebus-Antunes 8,9, Beat H. Meier 6, Nathalie Meiser 1,
34        Bula A, Bütikofer M, Camacho Zarco A, Carlomagno T,
                                                                         Miguel Mompeán 32, Elisa Monaca 7, Roland Montserret 4, Laura Moreno Perez 15,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       91
35              Caruso IP, Ceylan B, Chaikuad A, Chu F, Cole L,
                                                                         Celine Moser 34, Claudia Muhle-Goll 34, Thaís Cristtina Neves-Martins 8,9, Xiamonin Ni 20,21,                                                 92
                   Crosby MG, Dhamotharan K, Felli IC, Ferner J,
36         Fleischmann Y, Fogeron M-L, Fourkiotis NK, Fuks C,            Brenna Norton-Baker 13, Roberta Pierattelli 24,25, Letizia Pontoriero 24,25, Yulia Pustovalova 28,                                            93
37              Fürtig B, Gallo A, Gande SL, Gerez JA, Ghosh D,
                                                                         Oliver Ohlenschläger 30, Julien Orts 6, Andrea T. Da Poian 9, Dennis J. Pyper 1,2,                                                            94
38            Gomes-Neto F, Gorbatyuk O, Guseva S, Hacker C,
                                                                         Christian Richter 1,2, Roland Riek 6, Angus Robertson 14, Anderson S. Pinheiro 8,12,                                                          95
           Häfner S, Hargittay B, Henzler-Wildman K, Hoch JC,
39        Hohmann K, Hutchison MT, Jaudzems K, de Jesus V,               Raffaele Sabbatella 7, Nicola Salvi 15, Krishna Saxena 1,2, Linda Schulte 1,2,                                                                96
40        Jovic K, Kaderli J, Kalniņš G, Kaņepe I, Kirchdoerfer RN,   Marco Schiavina 24,25, Harald Schwalbe 1,2*‡, Mara Silber 34, Marcius da Silva Almeida 8,9,                                                   97
41                  Kirkpatrick J, Knapp S, Krishnathas R, Kutz F,
          zur Lage S, Lambertz R, Lang A, Laurents D, Lecoq L,
                                                                         Marc A. Sprague-Piercy 23, Georgios A. Spyroulias 26, Sridhar Sreeramulu 1,2,                                                                 98
42               Linhard V, Löhr F, Malki A, Mamigonian Bessa L,         Jan-Niklas Tants 2,3, Kaspars Ta rs 31, Felix Torres 6, Sabrina Töws 3, Miguel Á. Treviño 32,                                                99
43                   Martin RW, Matzel T, Maurin D, McNutt SW,                         1
                                                                         Sven Trucks , Aikaterini C. Tsika 26, Krisztina Varga 22, Ying Wang 17, Marco E. Weber 6,                                                    100
44                      Mebus-Antunes NC, Meier BH, Meiser N,
                          Mompeán M, Monaca E, Montserret R,
                                                                         Julia E. Weigand 35, Christoph Wiedemann 36, Julia Wirmer-Bartoschek 1,2,                                                                    101
45                      Moreno Perez L, Moser C, Muhle-Goll C,           Maria Alexandra Wirtz Martin 1,2, Johannes Zehnder 6, Martin Hengesbach 1*‡ and                                                              102
46        Neves-Martins TC, Ni X, Norton-Baker B, Pierattelli R,         Andreas Schlundt 2,3*‡                                                                                Q4                                     103
47
          Pontoriero L, Pustovalova Y, Ohlenschläger O, Orts J,                                                                                                                                                  Q5   104
                      T. Da Poian A, Pyper DJ, Richter C, Riek R,        1
                                                                          Institute for Organic Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2Center of              Q6
48              Robertson A, S. Pinheiro A, Sabbatella R, Salvi N,
                                                                         Biomolecular Magnetic Resonance (BMRZ), Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 3Institute for Molecular               Q7   105
49                Saxena K, Schulte L, Schiavina M, Schwalbe H,
                                                                         Biosciences, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 4Molecular Microbiology and Structural Biochemistry,                   106
                Silber M, da Silva Almeida M, Sprague-Piercy MA,
50               Spyroulias GA, Sreeramulu S, Tants J-N, Tars K,        UMR 5086, CNRS/Lyon University, Grenoble, France, 5Institute for Biochemistry, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main,               107
51            Torres F, Töws S, Treviño MÁ, Trucks S, Tsika AC,          Germany, 6Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Laboratory of Physical Chemistry, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 7Structural              108
52                    Varga K, Wang Y, Weber ME, Weigand JE,             Biology and Biophysics Unit, Fondazione Ri.MED, Palermo, Italy, 8National Center of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (CNRMN,                       109
          Wiedemann C, Wirmer-Bartoschek J, Wirtz Martin MA,             CENABIO), Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 9Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Federal University of Rio
53             Zehnder J, Hengesbach M and Schlundt A (2021)                                                                                                                                                          110
                                                                         de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 10Multidisciplinary Center for Research in Biology (NUMPEX), Campus Duque de Caxias Federal
54            Large-Scale Recombinant Production of the SARS-
                                                                         University of Rio de Janeiro, Duque de Caxias, Brazil, 11Institute for Molecular Virology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      111
55         CoV-2 Proteome for High-Throughput and Structural
                                                                         Madison, WI, United States, 12Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 13Department of          112
                                               Biology Applications.
56                                   Front. Mol. Biosci. 8:653148.       Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA, United States, 14LCP, NIDDK, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 15Univ. Grenoble        Q8   113
57                       doi: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.653148                  Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, Grenoble, France, 16Latvian Institute of Organic Synthesis, Riga, Latvia, 17BMWZ and Institute of Organic             114


          Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                                                 1                                               March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


             Altincekic et al.                                                                                                              SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



115                                                                                                                                                                                        172
                                                                             18
        Chemistry, Leibniz University Hannover, Hannover, Germany, Group of NMR-Based Structural Chemistry, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig,
116     Germany, 19Multiuser Center for Biomolecular Innovation (CMIB), Department of Physics, São Paulo State University (UNESP), São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 20Institute of           173
        Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 21Structural Genomics Consortium, Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Sciences,
117                                                                                                                                                                                        174
        Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 22Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Biomedical Sciences, University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, United States, 23Department of
118     Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, Irvine, CA, United States, 24Magnetic Resonance Centre (CERM), University of Florence, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy,
                                                                                                                                                                                           175
119     25
           Department of Chemistry “Ugo Schiff”, University of Florence, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy, 26Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, Patras, Greece, 27Laboratory of          176
120     Toxicology, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 28Department of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, UConn Health, Farmington, CT, United States,              177
121     29
           Signals GmbH & Co. KG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 30Leibniz Institute on Aging—Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany, 31Latvian Biomedical Research and Study           178
122     Centre,   Riga, Latvia, 32“Rocasolano” Institute for Physical Chemistry (IQFR), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Serrano, Spain, 33Institute of Biophysical Chemistry,    179
        Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 34IBG-4, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany, 35Department of Biology, Technical University of
123                                                                                                                                                                                        180
        Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, 36Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Charles Tanford Protein Centre, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale,
124                                                                                                                                                                                        181
        Germany
125                                                                                                                                                                                        182
126                                                                                                                                                                                        183
127 Q10                                                 The highly infectious disease COVID-19 caused by the Betacoronavirus SARS-CoV-2                                                    184
128                                                     poses a severe threat to humanity and demands the redirection of scientiﬁc efforts and                                             185
129                                                     criteria to organized research projects. The international COVID19-NMR consortium seeks                                            186
130                                                                                                                                                                                        187
                                                        to provide such new approaches by gathering scientiﬁc expertise worldwide. In particular,
131                                                                                                                                                                                        188
132                                                     making available viral proteins and RNAs will pave the way to understanding the SARS-                                              189
133                                                     CoV-2 molecular components in detail. The research in COVID19-NMR and the resources                                                190
134                                                     provided through the consortium are fully disclosed to accelerate access and exploitation.                                         191
135                                                     NMR investigations of the viral molecular components are designated to provide the                                                 192
136                                                                                                                                                                                        193
137                                                     essential basis for further work, including macromolecular interaction studies and high-                                           194
138                                                     throughput drug screening. Here, we present the extensive catalog of a holistic SARS-                                              195
139                                                     CoV-2 protein preparation approach based on the consortium’s collective efforts. We                                                196
140                                                     provide protocols for the large-scale production of more than 80% of all SARS-CoV-2                                                197
141                                                                                                                                                                                        198
                                                        proteins or essential parts of them. Several of the proteins were produced in more than one
142                                                                                                                                                                                        199
143                                                     laboratory, demonstrating the high interoperability between NMR groups worldwide. For                                              200
144                                                     the majority of proteins, we can produce isotope-labeled samples of HSQC-grade.                                                    201
145                                                     Together with several NMR chemical shift assignments made publicly available on                                                    202
146                                                     covid19-nmr.com, we here provide highly valuable resources for the production of                                                   203
147                                                                                                                                                                                        204
                                                        SARS-CoV-2 proteins in isotope-labeled form.
148                                                                                                                                                                                        205
149 Q11                                                 Keywords: COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, nonstructural proteins, structural proteins, accessory proteins, intrinsically                     206
150                                                     disordered region, cell-free protein synthesis, NMR spectroscopy                                                                   207
151                                                                                                                                                                                        208
152                                                                                                                                                                                        209
153 Q12 INTRODUCTION                                                                                proteases into functional, nonstructural proteins (nsps). ORF1a                        210
154                                                                                                 encodes eleven nsps, and ORF1ab additionally encodes the nsps                          211
155     Severe     acute   respiratory      syndrome     coronavirus       2 (SARS-CoV-2,           12–16. The downstream ORFs encode structural proteins (S, E,                           212
156     SCoV2)       is the  cause    of the  early 2020    pandemic       coronavirus    lung      M, and N) that are essential components for the synthesis of new                       213
157     disease     2019    (COVID-19)         and   belongs     to   Betacoronaviruses,       a    virus particles. In between those, additional proteins (accessory/                     214
158     genus     of  the Coronaviridae        family   covering    the   α−δ   genera  (Leao       auxiliary factors) are encoded, for which sequences partially                          215
159     et  al.,  2020).   The    large   RNA    genome      of  SCoV2      has  an intricate,      overlap (Finkel et al., 2020) and whose identiﬁcation and                              216
160     highly     condensed        arrangement      of  coding    sequences      (Wu   et  al.,    classiﬁcation     are a matter of ongoing research (Nelson et al.,                     217
161     2020).     Sequences       starting   with  the  main     start  codon    contain    an     2020;    Pavesi,  2020).  In total, the number of identiﬁed peptides or                218
162     open     reading    frame     1 (ORF1),   which    codes    for  two   distinct, large      proteins    generated    from     the viral genome is at least 28 on the               219
163     polypeptides       (pp),    whose    relative  abundance        is  governed   by   the     evidence     level,  with   an    additional set of smaller proteins or                220
164     action     of   an  RNA       pseudoknot      structure     element.     Upon    RNA        peptides    being   predicted     with    high likelihood.                             221
165     folding,      this   element       causes   a   −1    frameshift      to   allow    the         High-resolution       studies     of  SCoV and SCoV2 proteins have                 222
166     continuation         of   translation,    resulting     in   the   generation     of   a    been    conducted   using   all  canonical     structural biology approaches,          223
167     7,096-amino         acid     794  kDa    polypeptide.      If  the   pseudoknot       is    such    as X-ray   crystallography        on  proteases     (Zhang et al., 2020)       224
168     not    formed,      expression       of  the   ﬁrst   ORF      generates    a  4,405-       and   methyltransferases       (MT)      (Krafcikova     et  al., 2020), cryo-EM       225
169     amino       acid    490   kDa     polypeptide.     Both     the    short   and    long      of the    RNA    polymerase      (Gao     et al., 2020;   Yin   et al., 2020), and     226
170     polypeptides         translated      from    this    ORF      (pp1a     and    pp1ab,       liquid-state    (Almeida      et  al., 2007;    Serrano    et  al., 2009; Cantini      227
171     respectively)       are    posttranslationally       cleaved     by   virus-encoded         et al., 2020;  Gallo  et al., 2020;    Korn   et  al., 2020a;  Korn   et al., 2020b;   228


             Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                             2                                            March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


      Altincekic et al.                                                                                                      SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



229   TABLE 1 | SCoV2 protein constructs expressed and puriﬁed, given with the genomic position and corresponding PDBs for construct design.                               286
230   Protein genome position (nt)   a
                                               Trivial name construct   Size (aa)   Boundaries      MW (kD )  a
                                                                                                                  Homol. SCoV       Template PDB   c
                                                                                                                                                        SCoV2 PDB      d   287
231                                                   expressed                                                      (%)b                                                  288
232                                                                                                                                                                        289
      nsp1                                     Leader                     180                         19.8              84
233                                                                                                                                                                        290
      266–805
234                                            Full-length                180            1–180        19.8              83                                                 291
235                                            Globular domain (GD)       116           13–127        12.7              85               2GDT               7K7P           292
236   nsp2                                                                638                         70.5              68                                                 293
237   806–2,719                                                                                                                                                            294
                                               C-terminal IDR (CtDR)       45           557–601        4.9              55
238   nsp3                                                               1,945                        217.3             76
                                                                                                                                                                           295
239   2,720–8,554                                                                                                                                                          296
240     a
                                               Ub-like (Ubl) domain       111            1–111        12.4              79                2IDY              7KAG           297
241                                                                                                                                                                        298
        a
                                               Ub-like (Ubl) domain       206            1–206        23.2              58
242     b
                                               + IDR
                                                                                                                                                                           299
                                               Macrodomain                170         207–376         18.3              74               6VXS               6VXS
243     c
                                               SUD-N                      140         409–548         15.4              69               2W2G
                                                                                                                                                                           300
244     c
                                               SUD-NM                     267         409–675         29.5              74               2W2G                              301
245     c
                                               SUD-M                      125         551–675         13.9              82               2W2G                              302
246                                                                                                                                                                        303
        c
                                               SUD-MC                     195         551–745         21.5              79               2KQV
        c
                                               SUD-C                       64         680–743          7.3              73               2KAF
247     d                                                                                                                                                                  304
                                               Papain-like protease       318        743–1,060         36               83               6W9C              6W9C
248                                            PLpro                                                                                                                       305
249     e
                                               NAB                        116       1,088–1,203       13.4              87                2K87                             306
250     Y                                      CoV-Y                      308       1,638–1,945        34               89                                                 307
251   nsp5                                     Main protease (Mpro)       306                         33.7              96                                                 308
      10,055–10,972
252                                                                                                                                                                        309
                                               Full-lengthe               306            1–306        33.7              96                6Y84              6Y84
253   nsp7                                                                 83                          9.2              99                                                 310
254   11,843–12,091                                                                                                                                                        311
255                                            Full-length                83             1–83          9.2              99                6WIQ              6WIQ           312
256   nsp8                                                                198                         21.9              98                                                 313
      12,092–12,685
257                                            Full-length                198            1–198        21.9              97                6WIQ              6WIQ
                                                                                                                                                                           314
258   nsp9                                                                113                         12.4              97                                                 315
259   12,686–13,024                                                                                                                                                        316
260                                            Full-length                113            1–113        12.4              97               6W4B              6W4B            317
261   nsp10                                                               139                         14.8              97
                                                                                                                                                                           318
      13,025–13,441
262                                            Full-length                139            1–139        14.8             97                6W4H              6W4H
                                                                                                                                                                           319
263   nsp13                                    Helicase                   601                         66.9             100                                                 320
264   16,237–18,039                                                                                                                                                        321
265                                            Full-length                601            1–601        66.9             100                6ZSL              6ZSL           322
      nsp14                                    Exonuclease/               527                         59.8              95
266                                                                                                                                                                        323
      18,040–19,620                            methyltransferase
267                                            Full-length                527            1–527        59.8              95                5NFY                             324
268                                            Mtase domain               240           288–527       27.5              95                                                 325
269   nsp15                                    Endonuclease               346                         38.8              89                                                 326
270   19,621–20,658                                                                                                                                                        327
                                               Full-length                346            1–346        38.8              89               6W01               6W01
271                                                                                                                                                                        328
      nsp16                                    Methyltransferase          298                         33.3              93
272   20,659–21,552                                                                                                                                                        329
273                                            Full-length                298            1–298        33.3              93               6W4H              6W4H            330
274   ORF3a                                                               275                         31.3              72                                                 331
275   25,393–26,220                                                                                                                                                        332
                                               Full-length                275            1–275        31.3              72               6XDC               6XDC
276   ORF4                                     Envelope (E) protein        75                          8.4              95
                                                                                                                                                                           333
277   26,245–26,472                                                                                                                                                        334
278                                            Full-length                 75            1–75          8.4              95               5 × 29             7K3G           335
279   ORF5                                     Membrane                   222                         25.1              91                                                 336
280   26,523–27,387                            glycoprotein (M)
                                                                                                                                                                           337
                                               Full-length                222            1–222        25.1              91
281   ORF6                                                                61                           7.3              69
                                                                                                                                                                           338
282   27,202–27,387                                                                                                                                                        339
283                                            Full-length                61             1–61          7.3              69                                                 340
284   ORF7a                                                               121                         13.7              85                                                 341
      27,394–27,759
285                                                                                                                                                                        342
                                                                                                                                       (Continued on following page)



      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                      3                                          March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


      Altincekic et al.                                                                                                              SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



343   TABLE 1 | (Continued) SCoV2 protein constructs expressed and puriﬁed, given with the genomic position and corresponding PDBs for construct design.                               400
344   Protein genome position (nt)   a
                                               Trivial name construct       Size (aa)     Boundaries      MW (kD )  a
                                                                                                                         Homol. SCoV        Template PDB    c
                                                                                                                                                                SCoV2 PDB      d       401
345                                                   expressed                                                             (%)b                                                       402
346                                                                                                                                                                                    403
                                               Ectodomain (ED)                 66             16–81          7.4               85                 1XAK              6W37
347                                                                                                                                                                                    404
      ORF7b                                                                    43                            5.2               85
348   27,756–27,887                                                                                                                                                                    405
349                                            Full-length                    43              1–43            5.2              85                                                      406
350   ORF8                                                                    121                            13.8              32                                                      407
351   27,894–28,259                                                                                                                                                                    408
        ORF8                                   Full-length                    121             1–121          13.8              32                 7JTL                  7JTL
352     ΔORF8                                  W/o signal                     106            16–121           12               41                 7JTL                  7JTL
                                                                                                                                                                                       409
353   ORF9a                                    Nucleocapsid (N)               419                            45.6              91                                                      410
354   28,274–29,533                                                                                                                                                                    411
355                                            IDR1-NTD- IDR2                 248              1–248         26.5              90                                                      412
356                                            NTD-SR                         169             44–212         18.1              92                                                      413
                                               NTD                            136             44–180         14.9              93                  6YI3                 6YI3
357                                            CTD                            118            247–364         13.3              96                 2JW8                  7C22
                                                                                                                                                                                       414
358   ORF9b                                                                    97                            10.8              72                                                      415
359   28,284–28,574                                                                                                                                                                    416
360                                            Full-length                     97             1–97           10.8              72                 6Z4U                  6Z4U           417
361   ORF14                                                                    73                             8                n.a
                                                                                                                                                                                       418
      28,734–28,952
362                                            Full-length                     73             1–73            8                n.a
                                                                                                                                                                                       419
363   ORF10                                                                    38                            4.4               29                                                      420
364   29,558–29,674                                                                                                                                                                    421
365                                            Full-length                     38             1–38           4.4               29                                                      422
366   a
        Genome position in nt corresponding to SCoV2 NCBI reference genome entry NC_045512.2, identical to GenBank entry MN908947.3 (2).                                               423
367   b
        Sequence identities to SCoV are calculated from an alignment with corresponding protein sequences based on the genome sequence of NCBI Reference NC_004718.3.                  424
368                                                                                                                                                                                    425
      c
        Representative PDB that was available at the beginning of construct design, either SCoV or SCoV2.
      d
        Representative PDB available for SCoV2 (as of December 2020).
369   e
        Additional point mutations in ﬂ-construct have been expressed.
                                                                                                                                                                                       426
370   n.a.: not applicable.                                                                                                                                                            427
371                                                                                                                                                                                    428
372   Kubatova et al., 2020; Tonelli et al., 2020) and solid-state NMR                            We here compile a compendium of more than 50 protocols                               429
373   spectroscopy of transmembrane (TM) proteins (Mandala et al.,                            (see Supplementary Tables SI1–SI23) for the production and                               430
374   2020). These studies have signiﬁcantly improved our                                     puriﬁcation of 23 of the 30 SCoV2 proteins or fragments thereof                          431
375   understanding on the functions of molecular components, and                             (summarized in Tables 1, 2). We deﬁned those 30 proteins as                          Q13 432
376   they all rely on the recombinant production of viral proteins in                        existing or putative ones to our current knowledge (see later                            433
377   high amount and purity.                                                                 discussion). This compendium has been generated in a                                     434
378       Apart from structures, puriﬁed SCoV2 proteins are required                          coordinated and concerted effort between >30 labs worldwide                              435
379   for experimental and preclinical approaches designed to                                 (Supplementary Table S1), with the aim of providing pure mg                              436
380   understand the basic principles of the viral life cycle and                             amounts of SCoV2 proteins. Our protocols include the rational                            437
381   processes underlying viral infection and transmission.                                  strategy for construct design (if applicable, guided by available                        438
382   Approaches range from studies on immune responses                                       homolog structures), optimization of expression, solubility, yield,                      439
383   (Esposito et al., 2020), antibody identiﬁcation (Jiang et al.,                          purity, and suitability for follow-up work, with a focus on                              440
384   2020), and interactions with other proteins or components of                            uniform stable isotope-labeling.                                                         441
385   the host cell (Bojkova et al., 2020; Gordon et al., 2020). These                            We also present protocols for a number of accessory and                              442
386   examples highlight the importance of broad approaches for the                           structural E and M proteins that could only be produced using                            443
387   recombinant production of viral proteins.                                               wheat-germ cell-free protein synthesis (WG-CFPS). In SCoV2,                              444
388       The research consortium COVID19-NMR found in 2020 seeks                             accessory proteins represent a class of mostly small and                                 445
389   to support the search for antiviral drugs using an NMR-based                            relatively poorly characterized proteins, mainly due to their                            446
390   screening approach. This requires the large-scale production of                         difﬁcult behavior in classical expression systems. They are                              447
391   all druggable proteins and RNAs and their NMR resonance                                 often found in inclusion bodies and difﬁcult to purify in                                448
392   assignments. The latter will enable solution structure                                  quantities adequate for structural studies. We thus here                                 449
393   determination of viral proteins and RNAs for rational drug                              exploit cell-free synthesis, mainly based on previous reports                            450
394   design and the fast mapping of compound binding sites. We                               on production and puriﬁcation of viral membrane proteins in                              451
395   have recently produced and determined secondary structures of                           general (Fogeron et al., 2015b; Fogeron et al., 2017; Jirasko                            452
396   SCoV2 RNA cis-regulatory elements in near completeness by                               et al., 2020b). Besides yields compatible with structural studies,                       453
397   NMR spectroscopy, validated by DMS-MaPseq (Wacker et al.,                               ribosomes in WG extracts further possess an increased folding                            454
398   2020), to provide a basis for RNA-oriented fragment screens                             capacity (Netzer and Hartl, 1997), favorable for those more                              455
399   with NMR.                                                                               complicated proteins.                                                                    456


      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                           4                                             March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


      Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



457   TABLE 2 | Summary of SCoV2 protein production results in Covid19-NMR.                                                                                                           514
458   Construct            Yields [mg/L] ora
                                                   Results                                     Comments                                           BMRB          Supplementary         515
459   expressed                (mg/mL)b                                                                                                                            Material           516
460                                                                                                                                                                                   517
      nsp1                                                                                                                                                             SI1
461                                                                                                                                                                                   518
        ﬂ                           5            NMR             Expression only at >20°C; after 7 days at 25°C partial proteolysis              50,620c
462                                              assigned                                                                                                                             519
463     GD                         >0.5          HSQC            High expression; mainly insoluble; higher salt increases stability                                                   520
464                                                              (>250 mM)                                                                                                            521
465   nsp2                                                                                                                                                             SI2            522
        CtDR                     0.7–1.5         NMR             Assignment with His-tag shown in (Mompean et al., 2020)                         50,687c
466                                              assigned
                                                                                                                                                                                      523
467   nsp3                                                                                                                                                             SI3            524
468     UBl                        0.7           HSQC            Highly stable over weeks; spectrum overlays with Ubl + IDR                                                           525
469     UBl + IDR                  2–3           NMR             Highly stable for >2 weeks at 25°C                                              50,446d                              526
470                                              assigned
                                                                                                                                                                                      527
        Macrodomain                 9            NMR             Highly stable for >1 week at 25°C and > 2 weeks at 4°C                          50,387d
471                                              assigned                                                                                        50,388d
                                                                                                                                                                                      528
472     SUD-N                       14           NMR             Highly stable for >10 days at 25°C                                              50,448d                              529
473                                              assigned                                                                                                                             530
474     SUD-NM                     17            HSQC            Stable for >1 week at 25°C                                                                                           531
        SUD-M                      8.5           NMR             Signiﬁcant precipitation during measurement; tendency to dimerize               50,516d
475                                                                                                                                                                                   532
                                                 assigned
476     SUD-MC                     12            HSQC            Stable for >1 week at 25°C                                                                                           533
477     SUD-C                      4.7           NMR             Stable for >10 days at 25°C                                                     50,517d                              534
478                                              assigned                                                                                                                             535
479     PLpro                      12            HSQC            Solubility-tag essential for expression; tendency to aggregate                                                       536
        NAB                        3.5           NMR             Highly stable for >1 week at 25°C; stable for >5 weeks at 4°C                   50,334d
480                                                                                                                                                                                   537
                                                 assigned
481     CoV-Y                       12           HSQC            Low temperature (<25°C) and low concentrations (>0.2 M) favor                                                        538
482                                                              stability; gradual degradation at 25°C; lithium bromide in ﬁnal buffer                                               539
483                                                              supports solubility                                                                                                  540
484   nsp5                                                                                                                                                             SI4            541
        ﬂ                           55           HSQC            Impaired dimerization induced by artiﬁcial N-terminal residues
485   nsp7                                                                                                                                                             SI5
                                                                                                                                                                                      542
486     ﬂ                           17           NMR             Stable for several days at 35°C; stable for >1 month at 4°C                     50,337d                              543
487                                              assigned                                                                                                                             544
488   nsp8                                                                                                                                                             SI6            545
        ﬂ
489                                 17           HSQC            Concentration dependent aggregation; low concentrations favor
                                                                                                                                                                                      546
                                                                 stability
490   nsp9                                                                                                                                                             SI7
                                                                                                                                                                                      547
491     ﬂ                          4.5           NMR             Stable dimer for >4 months at 4°C and >2 weeks at 25°C                          50,621d                              548
492                                              assigned                                                                                        50,622d                              549
493                                                                                                                                              50,513                               550
      nsp10                                                                                                                                                            SI8
494                                                                                                                                                                                   551
        ﬂ                           15           NMR             Zn2+ addition during expression and puriﬁcation increases protein                50,392
495                                              assigned        stability; stable for >1 week at 25°C                                                                                552
496   nsp13                                                                                                                                                            SI9            553
497     ﬂ                          0.5           HSQC            Low expression; protein unstable; concentration above 20 µM not                                                      554
498                                                              possible                                                                                                             555
      nsp14                                                                                                                                                           SI10
499                                                                                                                                                                                   556
        ﬂ                           6            Pure protein    Not above 50µM; best storage: with 50% (v/v) glycerol; addition of
500                                                              reducing agents                                                                                                      557
501     Mtase                       10           Pure protein    As ﬂ nsp14; high salt (>0.4 M) for increased stability; addition of                                                  558
502                                                              reducing agents                                                                                                      559
503   nsp15                                                                                                                                                           SI11            560
        ﬂ                           5            HSQC            Tendency to aggregate at 25°C
504   nsp16                                                                                                                                                           SI12
                                                                                                                                                                                      561
505     ﬂ                           10           Pure protein    Addition of reducing agents; 5% (v/v) glycerol favorable; highly unstable                                            562
506   ORF3a                                                                                                                                                           SI13            563
507     ﬂ                          0.6           Pure protein    Addition of detergent during expression (0.05% Brij-58); stable protein                                              564
508   E protein                                                                                                                                                       SI14
                                                                                                                                                                                      565
        ﬂ                          0.45          Pure protein    Addition of detergent during expression (0.05% Brij-58); stable protein
509   M Protein                                                                                                                                                       SI15
                                                                                                                                                                                      566
510     ﬂ                          0.33          Pure protein    Addition of detergent during expression (0.05% Brij-58); stable protein                                              567
511   ORF6                                                                                                                                                             SI16           568
512                                                                                                                                                 (Continued on following page)     569
513                                                                                                                                                                                   570


      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                             5                                                 March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


      Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                  SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



571   TABLE 2 | (Continued) Summary of SCoV2 protein production results in Covid19-NMR.                                                                                                 628
572   Construct                             a
                             Yields [mg/L] or         Results                                     Comments                                          BMRB          Supplementary         629
573   expressed                  (mg/mL)b                                                                                                                            Material           630
574                                                                                                                                                                                     631
          ﬂ                         0.27            HSQC            Soluble expression without detergent; stable protein; no expression
575                                                                                                                                                                                     632
                                                                    with STREP-tag at N-terminus
576   ORF7a                                                                                                                                                             SI17            633
577    ED                            0.4            HSQC            Unpuriﬁed protein tends to precipitate during refolding, puriﬁed protein                                            634
578                                                                 stable for 4 days at 25°C                                                                                           635
579   ORF7b                                                                                                                                                             SI18            636
        ﬂ                            0.6            HSQC            Tendency to oligomerize; solubilizing agents needed
580     ﬂ                           0.27            HSQC            Addition of detergent during expression (0.1% MNG-3); stable protein
                                                                                                                                                                                        637
581   ORF8                                                                                                                                                              SI19            638
582     ﬂ                           0.62            HSQC            Tendency to oligomerize                                                                                             639
583     ΔORF8                        0.5            Pure protein                                                                                                                        640
584   N protein                                                                                                                                                         SI20            641
        IDR1-NTD-                    12             NMR             High salt (>0.4 M) for increased stability                                     50,618,
585   IDR2                                          assigned                                                                                       50,619c
                                                                                                                                                                                        642
586     NTD-SR                        3             HSQC                                                                                                                                643
587     NTD                           3             HSQC                                                                                           34,511                               644
588     CTD                           2             NMR             Stable dimer for >4 months at 4°C and >3 weeks at 30°C                         50,518d                              645
589                                                 assigned
                                                                                                                                                                                        646
      ORF9b                                                                                                                                                             SI21
590    ﬂ                            0.64            HSQC            Expression without detergent, protein is stable
                                                                                                                                                                                        647
591   ORF14                                                                                                                                                             SI22            648
592    ﬂ                            0.43            HSQC            Addition of detergent during expression (0.05% Brij-58); stable in                                                  649
593                                                                 detergent but unstable on lipid reconstitution                                                                      650
      ORF10                                                                                                                                                             SI23
594                                                                                                                                                                                     651
       Fl                             2             HSQC            Tendency to oligomerize; unstable upon tag cleavage
595                                                                                                                                                                                     652
596                                                                                                                                                                                     653
      a
       Yields from bacterial expression represent the minimal protein amount in mg/L independent of the cultivation medium.
      b
        Yields from CFPS represent the minimal protein amount in mg/mL.
597   c
       COVID19-nmr BMRB depositions yet to be released.
                                                                                                                                                                                        654
598   d
        COVID19-nmr BMRB depositions.                                                                                                                                                   655
599                                                                                                                                                                                     656
600                                                                                                                                                                                     657
601      We exemplify in more detail the optimization of protein                                  including information about coding sequences, restriction                             658
602   production, isotope-labeling, and puriﬁcation for proteins                                  sites, fusion tags, and vector backbones.                                             659
603   with different individual challenges: the nucleic acid–binding                                                                                                                    660
604   (NAB) domain of nsp3e, the main protease nsp5, and several                                  Protein Production and Puriﬁcation                                                    661
605   auxiliary proteins. For the majority of produced and puriﬁed                                For SCoV2 proteins, we primarily used heterologous production                         662
606   proteins, we achieve >95% purity and provide 15 N-HSQC                                      in E. coli. Detailed protocols of individual full-length (ﬂ) proteins,                663
607   spectra as the ultimate quality measure. We also provide                                    separate domains, combinations, or particular expression                              664
608   additional suggestions for challenging proteins, where our                                  constructs as listed in Table 1 can be found in the                                   665
609   protocols represent a unique resource and starting point                                    (Supplementary Tables SI1–SI23).                                                      666
610   exploitable by other labs.                                                                     The ORF3a, ORF6, ORF7b, ORF8, ORF9b, and ORF14                                     667
611                                                                                               accessory proteins and the structural proteins M and E were                           668
612                                                                                               produced by wheat-germ cell-free protein synthesis (WG-                               669
613   MATERIALS AND METHODS                                                                       CFPS) as described in the Supplementary Material. In                                  670
614                                                                                               brief, transcription and translation steps have been                                  671
615   Strains, Plasmids, and Cloning                                                              performed separately, and detergent has been added for the                            672
616   The rationale of construct design for all proteins can be found                             synthesis of membrane proteins as described previously (Takai                         673
617   within the respective protocols in SI1-23. For bacterial                                    et al., 2010; Fogeron et al., 2017).                                                  674
618   production, E. coli strains and expression plasmids are                                                                                                                           675
619   given; for WG-CFPS, template vectors are listed. Protein                                    NMR Spectroscopy                                                                      676
620   coding sequences of interest have been obtained as either                                   All amide correlation spectra, either HSQC- or TROSY-based, are                       677
621   commercial, codon-optimized genes or, for shorter ORFs and                                  representative examples. Details on their acquisition parameters                      678
622   additional sequences, annealed from oligonucleotides prior                                  and the raw data are freely accessible through https://covid19-                       679
623   to insertion into the relevant vector. Subcloning of inserts,                               nmr.de/or upon request.                                                               680
624   adjustment of boundaries, and mutations of genes have been                                                                                                                        681
625   carried out by standard molecular biology techniques. All                                   Data Availability Statement                                                           682
626   expression plasmids can be obtained upon request from the                                   Assignments of backbone chemical shifts have been deposited at                        683
627   COVID19-NMR consortium (https://covid19-nmr.de/),                                           BMRB for proteins, as shown in Table 2, indicated by their                            684


      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                                6                                                March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


      Altincekic et al.                                                                                                               SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



685                                                                                                                                                                              742
686                                                                                                                                                                              743
687                                                                                                                                                                              744
688                                                                                                                                                                              745
689                                                                                                                                                                              746
690                                                                                                                                                                              747
691                                                                                                                                                                              748
692                                                                                                                                                                              749
693                                                                                                                                                                              750
694                                                                                                                                                                              751
695                                                                                                                                                                              752
696                                                                                                                                                                              753
697                                                                                                                                                                              754
698                                                                                                                                                                              755
699                                                                                                                                                                              756
700                                                                                                                                                                              757
701                                                                                                                                                                              758
702                                                                                                                                                                              759
703     FIGURE 1 | Genomic organization of proteins and current state of analysis or puriﬁcation. Boxes represent the domain boundaries as outlined in the text and in           760
        Table 1. Their position corresponds with the genomic loci. Colors indicate whether the pure proteins were puriﬁed (yellow), analyzed by NMR using only HSQC (lime), or
704                                                                                                                                                                              761
        characterized in detail, including NMR resonance assignments (green).
705                                                                                                                                                                              762
706                                                                                                                                                                              763
707                                                                                                                                                                              764
708                                                                                                                                                                              765
709
      respective BMRB IDs. All expression constructs are available as                          Nonstructural Proteins                                                            766
      plasmids from https://covid19-nmr.de/.                                                   We have approached and challenged the recombinant
710                                                                                            production of a large part of the SCoV2 nsps (Figure 1),                          767
711                                                                                            with great success (Table 2). We excluded nsp4 and nsp6                           768
712                                                                                                                                                                              769
713
      RESULTS                                                                                  (TM proteins), which are little characterized and do not reveal
                                                                                                                                                                                 770
                                                                                               soluble, folded domains by prediction (Oostra et al., 2007;
714   In the following, we provide protocols for the puriﬁcation of                            Oostra et al., 2008). The function of the very short (13 aa)                      771
715   SCoV2 proteins sorted into 1) nonstructural proteins and 2)                              nsp11 is unknown, and it seems to be a mere copy of the                           772
716   structural proteins together with accessory ORFs. Table 1                                nsp12 amino-terminal residues, remaining as a protease                            773
717   shows an overview of expression constructs. We use a                                     cleavage product of ORF1a. Further, we left out the RNA-                          774
718   consequent terminology of those constructs, which is guided                              dependent RNA polymerase nsp12 in our initial approach                            775
719   by domains, intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) or other                             because of its size (>100 kDa) and known unsuitability for                        776
720   particularly relevant sequence features within them. This study                          heterologous recombinant production in bacteria. Work on                          777
721   uses the SCoV2 NCBI reference genome entry NC_045512.2,                                  NMR-suitable nsp12 bacterial production is ongoing, while                         778
722   identical to GenBank entry MN908947.3 (Wu et al., 2020),                                 other expert labs have succeeded in purifying nsp12 for cryo-                     779
723   unless denoted differently in the respective protocols. Any                              EM applications in different systems (Gao et al., 2020; Hillen                    780
724   relevant deﬁnition of boundaries can also be found in the SI                             et al., 2020). For the remainder of nsps, we here provide                         781
725   protocols.                                                                               protocols for ﬂ-proteins or relevant fragments of them.                           782
726      As applicable for a major part of our proteins, we further                                                                                                              783
727   deﬁne a standard procedure for the puriﬁcation of soluble                                nsp1                                                                              784
728   His-tagged proteins that are obtained through the sequence                               nsp1 is the very N-terminus of the polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab                    785
729   of IMAC, TEV/Ulp1 Protease cleavage, Reverse IMAC, and                                   and one of the most enigmatic viral proteins, expressed only in α-                786
730   Size-exclusion chromatography, eventually with individual                                and β-CoVs (Narayanan et al., 2015). Interestingly, nsp1 displays                 787
731   alterations, modiﬁcations, or additional steps. For convenient                           the highest divergence in sequence and size among different                       788
732   reading, we will thus use the abbreviation IPRS to avoid                                 CoVs, justifying it as a genus-speciﬁc marker (Snijder et al., 2003).             789
733   redundant protocol description. Details for every protein,                               It functions as a host shutoff factor by suppressing innate                       790
734   including detailed expression conditions, buffers, incubation                            immune functions and host gene expression (Kamitani et al.,                       791
735   times, supplements, storage conditions, yields, and stability,                           2006; Narayanan et al., 2008; Schubert et al., 2020). This                        792
736   can be found in the respective Supplementary Tables                                      suppression is achieved by an interaction of the                                  793
737   SI1–SI23 (see also Supplementary Tables S1, S2) and                                      nsp1 C-terminus with the mRNA entry tunnel within the 40 S                        794
738   Tables 1, 2. Entries in the tables are linked to the                                     subunit of the ribosome (Schubert et al., 2020; Thoms et al.,                     795
739   respective protocols for convenient download.                                            2020).                                                                            796
740                                                                                                                                                                              797
741                                                                                                                                                                              798


      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                             7                                            March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


      Altincekic et al.                                                                                                              SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



799                                                                                                                                                                              856
800                                                                                                                                                                              857
801                                                                                                                                                                              858
802                                                                                                                                                                              859
803                                                                                                                                                                              860
804                                                                                                                                                                              861
805                                                                                                                                                                              862
806                                                                                                                                                                              863
807                                                                                                                                                                              864
808                                                                                                                                                                              865
809                                                                                                                                                                              866
810                                                                                                                                                                              867
811                                                                                                                                                                              868
812                                                                                                                                                                              869
813                                                                                                                                                                              870
814                                                                                                                                                                              871
815                                                                                                                                                                              872
816                                                                                                                                                                              873
817                                                                                                                                                                              874
818                                                                                                                                                                              875
819                                                                                                                                                                              876
820                                                                                                                                                                              877
821                                                                                                                                                                              878
822                                                                                                                                                                              879
823                                                                                                                                                                              880
824                                                                                                                                                                              881
825                                                                                                                                                                              882
826                                                                                                                                                                              883
827                                                                                                                                                                              884
828                                                                                                                                                                              885
829                                                                                                                                                                              886
830                                                                                                                                                                              887
831                                                                                                                                                                              888
832     FIGURE 2 | 1H, 15N-correlation spectra of investigated nonstructural proteins. Construct names according to Table 1 are indicated unless ﬂ-proteins are shown. A         889
833     representative SDS-PAGE lane with ﬁnal samples is included as inset. Spectra for nsp3 constructs are collectively shown in Figure 3.                                     890
834                                                                                                                                                                              891
835                                                                                                                                                                              892
836      As summarized in Table 1, ﬂ-domain boundaries of nsp1 were                            2020). The precise function, however, is insufﬁciently                            893
837   chosen to contain the ﬁrst 180 amino acids, in analogy to its                            understood. Despite its potential dispensability for viral                        894
838   closest homolog from SCoV (Snijder et al., 2003). In addition, a                         replication in general, it might be a valuable model to gain                      895
839   shorter construct was designed, encoding only the globular core                          insights into virulence due to its possible involvement in the                    896
840   domain (GD, aa 13–127) suggested by the published SCoV nsp1                              regulation of global RNA synthesis (Graham et al., 2005). We                      897
841   NMR structure (Almeida et al., 2007). His-tagged ﬂ nsp1 was                              provide here a protocol for the puriﬁcation of the C-terminal IDR                 898
842   puriﬁed using the IPRS approach. Protein quality was conﬁrmed                            (CtDR) of nsp2 from residues 557 to 601, based on disorder                        899
843   by the available HSQC spectrum (Figure 2). Despite the ﬂexible                           predictions [PrDOS (Ishida and Kinoshita, 2007)]. The His-Trx-                    900
844   C-terminus, we were able to accomplish a near-complete                                   tagged peptide was puriﬁed by IPRS. Upon dialysis, two IEC steps                  901
845   backbone assignment (manuscript submitted).                                              were performed: ﬁrst anionic and then cationic, with good ﬁnal                    902
846      Interestingly, the nsp1 GD was found to be problematic in our                         yields (Table 1). Stability and purity were conﬁrmed by an HSQC                   903
847   hands despite good expression. We observed insolubility,                                 spectrum (Figure 2) and a complete backbone assignment                            904
848   although buffers were used according to the homolog SCoV                                 (Mompean et al., 2020; Table 2).                                                  905
849   nsp1 GD (Almeida et al., 2007). Nevertheless, using a protocol                                                                                                             906
850   comparable to the one for ﬂ nsp1, we were able to record an                              nsp3                                                                              907
851   HSQC spectrum proving a folded protein (Figure 2).                                       nsp3, the largest nsp (Snijder et al., 2003), is composed of a                    908
852                                                                                            plethora of functionally related, yet independent, subunits. After                909
853   nsp2                                                                                     cleavage of nsp3 from the ﬂ ORF1-encoded polypeptide chain, it                    910
854   nsp2 has been suggested to interact with host factors involved in                        displays a 1945-residue multidomain protein, with individual                      911
855   intracellular signaling (Cornillez-Ty et al., 2009; Davies et al.,                       functional entities that are subclassiﬁed from nsp3a to nsp3e                     912


      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                             8                                            March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


      Altincekic et al.                                                                                                         SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



913                                                                                                                                                                         970
914                                                                                                                                                                         971
915                                                                                                                                                                         972
916                                                                                                                                                                         973
917                                                                                                                                                                         974
918                                                                                                                                                                         975
919                                                                                                                                                                         976
920                                                                                                                                                                         977
921                                                                                                                                                                         978
922                                                                                                                                                                         979
923                                                                                                                                                                         980
924                                                                                                                                                                         981
925                                                                                                                                                                         982
926                                                                                                                                                                         983
927                                                                                                                                                                         984
928                                                                                                                                                                         985
929                                                                                                                                                                         986
930                                                                                                                                                                         987
931                                                                                                                                                                         988
932                                                                                                                                                                         989
933                                                                                                                                                                         990
934                                                                                                                                                                         991
935                                                                                                                                                                         992
936                                                                                                                                                                         993
937                                                                                                                                                                         994
938                                                                                                                                                                         995
939                                                                                                                                                                         996
940                                                                                                                                                                         997
941                                                                                                                                                                         998
942                                                                                                                                                                         999
943                                                                                                                                                                        1000
944                                                                                                                                                                        1001
945                                                                                                                                                                        1002
946     FIGURE 3 | 1H, 15N-correlation spectra of investigated constructs from nonstructural protein 3. Construct names of subdomains according to Table 1 are             1003
947     indicated unless ﬂ-domains are shown. A representative SDS-PAGE lane with ﬁnal samples is included as inset. Red boxes indicate protein bands of interest.         1004
948                                                                                                                                                                        1005
949                                                                                                                                                                        1006
950   followed by the ectodomain embedded in two TM regions and the                        Khan et al., 2020), playing a potential role in virus replication. We           1007
951   very C-terminal CoV-Y domain. The soluble nsp3a-3e domains                           here provide protocols for the puriﬁcation of both the Ubl (aa                  1008
952   are linked by various types of linkers with crucial roles in the viral               1–111) and ﬂ nsp3a (aa 1–206), including the acidic IDR (Ubl +                  1009
953   life cycle and are located in the so-called viral cytoplasm, which is                IDR Table 1). Domain boundaries were deﬁned similar to the                      1010
954   separated from the host cell after budding off the endoplasmic                       published NMR structure of SCoV nsp3a (Serrano et al., 2007).                   1011
955   reticulum and contains the viral RNA (Wolff et al., 2020).                           His-tagged nsp3a Ubl + IDR and GST-tagged nsp3a Ubl were                        1012
956   Remarkably, the nsp3c substructure comprises three                                   each puriﬁed via the IPRS approach. nsp3a Ubl yielded mM                        1013
957   subdomains, making nsp3 the most complex SCoV2 protein.                              sample concentrations and displayed a well-dispersed HSQC                       1014
958   The precise function and eventual RNA-binding speciﬁcities of                        spectrum (Figure 3). Notably, the herein described protocol                     1015
959   nsp3 domains are not yet understood. We here focus on the nsp3                       also enables puriﬁcation of ﬂ nsp3a (Ubl + IDR) (Tables 1, 2).                  1016
960   domains a–e and provide elaborated protocols for additional                          Despite the unstructured IDR overhang, the excellent protein                    1017
961   constructs carrying relevant linkers or combinations of domains                      quality and stability allowed for near-complete backbone                        1018
962   (Table 1). Moreover, we additionally present a convenient                            assignment [Figure 3, (Salvi et al., 2021)].                                    1019
963   protocol for the puriﬁcation of the C-terminal CoV-Y domain.                                                                                                         1020
964                                                                                        nsp3b                                                                           1021
965   nsp3a                                                                                nsp3b is an ADP-ribose phosphatase macrodomain and                              1022
966   The N-terminal portion of nsp3 is comprised of a ubiquitin-like                      potentially plays a key role in viral replication. Moreover, the                1023
967   (Ubl) structured domain and a subsequent acidic IDR. Besides its                     de-ADP ribosylation function of nsp3b protects SCoV2 from                       1024
968   ability to bind ssRNA (Serrano et al., 2007), nsp3a has been                         antiviral host immune response, making nsp3b a promising drug                   1025
969   reported to interact with the nucleocapsid (Hurst et al., 2013;                      target (Frick et al., 2020). As summarized in Table 1, the domain               1026


      Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                         9                                          March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                           SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1027   boundaries of the herein investigated nsp3b are residues 207–376             nsp3e                                                                    1084
1028   of the nsp3 primary sequence and were identical to available                 nsp3e is unique to Betacoronaviruses and consists of a nucleic           1085
1029   crystal structures with PDB entries 6YWM and 6YWL                            acid–binding domain (NAB) and the so-called group 2-speciﬁc              1086
1030   (unpublished). For puriﬁcation, we used the IPRS approach,                   marker (G2M) (Neuman et al., 2008). Structural information is            1087
1031   which yielded pure ﬂ nsp3b (Table 2). Fl nsp3b displays well-                rare; while the G2M is predicted to be intrinsically disordered (Lei     1088
1032   dispersed HSQC spectra, making this protein an amenable target               et al., 2018); the only available experimental structure of the nsp3e    1089
1033   for NMR structural studies. In fact, we recently reported near-to-           NAB was solved from SCoV by the Wüthrich lab using solution              1090
1034   complete backbone assignments for nsp3b in its apo and ADP-                  NMR (Serrano et al., 2009). We here used this structure for a            1091
1035   ribose–bound form (Cantini et al., 2020).                                    sequence-based alignment to derive reasonable domain                     1092
1036                                                                                boundaries for the SCoV2 nsp3e NAB (Figures 4A,B). The Q141093
1037   nsp3c                                                                        high sequence similarity suggested using nsp3 residues                   1094
1038   The SARS unique domain (SUD) of nsp3c has been described as a                1,088–1,203 (Table 1). This polypeptide chain was encoded in             1095
1039   distinguishing feature of SCoVs (Snijder et al., 2003). However,             expression vectors comprising His- and His-GST tags, both                1096
1040   similar domains in more distant CoVs, such as MHV or MERS,                   cleavable by TEV protease. Both constructs showed excellent              1097
1041   have been reported recently (Chen et al., 2015; Kusov et al., 2015).         expression, suitable for the IPRS protocol (Figure 4C). Finally, a       1098
1042   nsp3c comprises three distinct globular domains, termed SUD-N,               homogenous NAB species, as supported by the ﬁnal gel of pooled           1099
1043   SUD-M, and SUD-C, according to their sequential arrangement:                 samples (Figure 4D), was obtained. The excellent protein quality         1100
1044   N-terminal (N), middle (M), and C-terminal (C). SUD-N and                    and stability are supported by the available HSQC (Figure 3) and         1101
1045   SUD-M develop a macrodomain fold similar to nsp3b and are                    a published backbone assignment (Korn et al., 2020a).                    1102
1046   described to bind G-quadruplexes (Tan et al., 2009), while SUD-C                                                                                      1103
1047   preferentially binds to purine-containing RNA (Johnson et al.,               nsp3Y                                                                    1104
1048   2010). Domain boundaries for SUD-N and SUD-M and for the                     nsp3Y is the most C-terminal domain of nsp3 and exists in all            1105
1049   tandem-domain SUD-NM were deﬁned in analogy to the SCoV                      coronaviruses (Neuman et al., 2008; Neuman, 2016). Together,             1106
1050   homolog crystal structure (Tan et al., 2009). Those for SUD-C                though, with its preceding regions G2M, TM 1, the ectodomain,            1107
1051   and the tandem SUD-MC were based on NMR solution                             TM2, and the Y1-domain, it has evaded structural investigations          1108
1052   structures of corresponding SARS-CoV homologs (Table 1)                      so far. The precise function of the CoV-Y domain remains                 1109
1053   (Johnson et al., 2010). SUD-N, SUD-C, and SUD-NM were                        unclear, but, together with the Y1-domain, it might affect               1110
1054   puriﬁed using GST afﬁnity chromatography, whereas SUD-M                      binding to nsp4 (Hagemeijer et al., 2014). We were able to               1111
1055   and SUD-MC were puriﬁed using His afﬁnity chromatography.                    produce and purify nsp3Y (CoV-Y) comprising amino acids                  1112
1056   Removal of the tag was achieved by thrombin cleavage and ﬁnal                1,638–1,945 (Table 1), yielding 12 mg/L with an optimized                1113
1057   samples of all domains were prepared subsequent to size-                     protocol that keeps the protein in a ﬁnal NMR buffer                     1114
1058   exclusion chromatography (SEC). Except for SUD-M, all                        containing HEPES and lithium bromide. Although the protein               1115
1059   constructs were highly stable (Table 2). Overall protein quality             still shows some tendency to aggregate and degrade (Table 2),            1116
1060   allowed for the assignment of backbone chemical shifts for the               and despite its relatively large size, the spectral quality is excellent 1117
1061   three single domains (Gallo et al., 2020) amd good resolved                  (Figure 3). nsp3 CoV-Y appears suitable for an NMR backbone              1118
1062   HSQC spectra also for the tandem domains (Figure 3).                         assignment carried out at lower concentrations in a deuterated           1119
1063                                                                                background (ongoing).                                                    1120
1064   nsp3d                                                                                                                                                 1121
1065   nsp3d comprises the papain-like protease (PLpro) domain of nsp3              nsp5                                                                     1122
1066   and, hence, is one of the two SCoV2 proteases that are responsible           The functional main protease nsp5 (Mpro) is a dimeric cysteine           1123
1067   for processing the viral polypeptide chain and generating                    protease (Ullrich and Nitsche, 2020). Amino acid sequence and            1124
1068   functional proteins (Shin et al., 2020). The domain boundaries               3D structure of SCoV [PDB 1P9U (Anand et al., 2003)] and                 1125
1069   of PLpro within nsp3 are set by residues 743 and 1,060 (Table 1).            SCoV2 (PDB 6Y2E [Zhang et al., 2020)] homologs are highly                1126
1070   The protein is particularly challenging, as it is prone to misfolding        conserved (Figures 5A,B). The dimer interface involves the               1127
1071   and rapid precipitation. We prepared His-tagged and His-                     N-termini of both monomers, which puts considerable                      1128
1072   SUMO-tagged PLpro. The His-tagged version mainly remained                    constraints on the choice of protein sequence for construct              1129
1073   in the insoluble fraction. Still, mg quantities could be puriﬁed             design regarding the N-terminus.                                         1130
1074   from the soluble fraction, however, greatly misfolded. Fusion to                 We thus designed different constructs differing in the               1131
1075   SUMO signiﬁcantly enhanced protein yield of soluble PLpro. The               N-terminus: the native N-terminus (wt), a GS mutant with the             1132
1076   His-SUMO-tag allowed simple IMAC puriﬁcation, followed by                    additional N-terminal residues glycine and serine as His-SUMO            1133
1077   cleavage with Ulp1 and isolation of cleaved PLpro via a second               fusion, and a GHM mutant with the amino acids glycine,                   1134
1078   IMAC. A ﬁnal puriﬁcation step using gel ﬁltration led to pure                histidine, and methionine located at the N-terminus with His-            1135
1079   PLpro of both unlabeled and 15N-labeled species (Table 2). The               tag and TEV cleavage site (Figure 5C). Puriﬁcation of all proteins       1136
1080   latter has allowed for the acquisition of a promising amide                  via the IPRS approach (Figures 5D,E) yielded homogenous and              1137
1081   correlation spectrum (Figure 3).                                             highly pure protein, analyzed by PAGE (Figure 5G), mass                  1138
1082                                                                                                                                                         1139
1083                                                                                                                                                         1140


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                10                                    March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                             SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1141                                                                                                                                                                             1198
1142                                                                                                                                                                             1199
1143                                                                                                                                                                             1200
1144                                                                                                                                                                             1201
1145                                                                                                                                                                             1202
1146                                                                                                                                                                             1203
1147                                                                                                                                                                             1204
1148                                                                                                                                                                             1205
1149                                                                                                                                                                             1206
1150                                                                                                                                                                             1207
1151                                                                                                                                                                             1208
1152                                                                                                                                                                             1209
1153                                                                                                                                                                             1210
1154                                                                                                                                                                             1211
1155                                                                                                                                                                             1212
1156                                                                                                                                                                             1213
1157                                                                                                                                                                             1214
1158                                                                                                                                                                             1215
1159                                                                                                                                                                             1216
1160                                                                                                                                                                             1217
1161                                                                                                                                                                             1218
1162                                                                                                                                                                             1219
1163                                                                                                                                                                             1220
1164                                                                                                                                                                             1221
1165                                                                                                                                                                             1222
1166                                                                                                                                                                             1223
1167                                                                                                                                                                             1224
1168                                                                                                                                                                             1225
1169                                                                                                                                                                             1226
1170                                                                                                                                                                             1227
1171                                                                                                                                                                             1228
1172                                                                                                                                                                             1229
1173     FIGURE 4 | Rationale of construct design, expression, and IPRS puriﬁcation of the nsp3e nucleic acid–binding domain (NAB). (A) NMR structural ensemble of the           1230
1174     homologous SCoV nsp3e (Serrano et al., 2009). The domain boundaries as displayed are given. (B) Sequence alignment of SCoV and SCoV2 regions representing the           1231
1175     nsp3e locus. Arrows indicate the sequence stretch as used for the structure in panel (A). The analogous region was used for the design of the two protein expression    1232
1176     constructs shown (C). Left, SDS-PAGE showing the expression of nsp3e constructs from panel (B) over 4 h at two different temperatures. Middle, SDS-PAGE                 1233
         showing the subsequent steps of IMAC. Right, SDS-PAGE showing steps and fractions obtained before and after TEV/dialysis and reverse IMAC. Boxes highlight the
1177     respective sample species of interest for further usage (D) SEC proﬁle of nsp3e following steps in panel (C) performed with a Superdex 75 16/600 (GE Healthcare)
                                                                                                                                                                                 1234
1178     column in the buffer as denoted in Supplementary Table SI3. The arrow indicates the protein peak of interest containing monomeric and homogenous nsp3e NAB              1235
1179     devoid of signiﬁcant contaminations of nucleic acids as revealed by the excellent 280/260 ratio. Right, SDS gel shows 0.5 µL of the ﬁnal NMR sample used for the        1236
1180     spectrum in Figure 3 after concentrating relevant SEC fractions.                                                                                                        1237
1181                                                                                                                                                                             1238
1182                                                                                                                                                                             1239
1183   spectrometry, and 2D [1H, 15N]-BEST TROSY spectra                                       established expression and IPRS puriﬁcation strategy for the                      1240
1184   (Figure 5H). Final yields are summarized in Table 2.                                    SCoV proteins (Kirchdoerfer and Ward, 2019) was                                   1241
1185                                                                                           successfully transferred, which resulted in decent yields of                      1242
1186   nsp7 and nsp8                                                                           reasonably stable proteins (Table 2). Driven by its intrinsically                 1243
1187   Both nsp7 and nsp8 are auxiliary factors of the polymerase                              oligomeric state, nsp8 showed some tendency toward                                1244
1188   complex together with the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase                                  aggregation, limiting the available sample concentration. The                     1245
1189   nsp12 and have high sequence homology with SCoV (100% and                               higher apparent molecular weight and limited solubility are                       1246
1190   99%, respectively) (Gordon et al., 2020). For nsp7 in complex                           also reﬂected in the success of NMR experiments. While we                         1247
1191   with nsp8 or for nsp8 alone, additional functions in RNA                                succeeded in a complete NMR backbone assignment of nsp7                           1248
1192   synthesis priming have been proposed (Tvarogova et al., 2019;                           (Tonelli et al., 2020), the quality of the spectra obtained for nsp8 is           1249
1193   Konkolova et al., 2020). In a recent study including an RNA-                            currently limited to the HSQC presented in Figure 2.                              1250
1194   substrate-bound structure (Hillen et al., 2020), both proteins                                                                                                            1251
1195   (with two molecules of nsp8 and one molecule of nsp7 for                                nsp9                                                                              1252
1196   each nsp12 RNA polymerase) were found to be essential for                               The 12.4 kDa ssRNA-binding nsp9 is highly conserved among                         1253
1197   polymerase activity in SCoV2. For both ﬂ-proteins, a previously                         Betacoronaviruses. It is a crucial part of the viral replication                  1254


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                           11                                            March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                   SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1255                                                                                                                                                                                   1312
1256                                                                                                                                                                                   1313
1257                                                                                                                                                                                   1314
1258                                                                                                                                                                                   1315
1259                                                                                                                                                                                   1316
1260                                                                                                                                                                                   1317
1261                                                                                                                                                                                   1318
1262                                                                                                                                                                                   1319
1263                                                                                                                                                                                   1320
1264                                                                                                                                                                                   1321
1265                                                                                                                                                                                   1322
1266                                                                                                                                                                                   1323
1267                                                                                                                                                                                   1324
1268                                                                                                                                                                                   1325
1269                                                                                                                                                                                   1326
1270                                                                                                                                                                                   1327
1271                                                                                                                                                                                   1328
1272                                                                                                                                                                                   1329
1273                                                                                                                                                                                   1330
1274                                                                                                                                                                                   1331
1275                                                                                                                                                                                   1332
1276                                                                                                                                                                                   1333
1277                                                                                                                                                                                   1334
1278                                                                                                                                                                                   1335
1279                                                                                                                                                                                   1336
1280                                                                                                                                                                                   1337
1281                                                                                                                                                                                   1338
1282                                                                                                                                                                                   1339
1283                                                                                                                                                                                   1340
1284                                                                                                                                                                                   1341
1285                                                                                                                                                                                   1342
1286                                                                                                                                                                                   1343
1287                                                                                                                                                                                   1344
1288                                                                                                                                                                                   1345
1289                                                                                                                                                                                   1346
1290                                                                                                                                                                                   1347
1291                                                                                                                                                                                   1348
1292     FIGURE 5 | Rationale of construct design, expression, and puriﬁcation of different nsp5 constructs. (A) Sequence alignment of SCoV and SCoV2 ﬂ nsp5. (B) X-ray                1349
1293     structural overlay of the homologous SCoV (PDB 1 P9U, light blue) and SCoV2 nsp5 (PDB 6Y2E, green) in cartoon representation. The catalytic dyad (H41 and C145) is            1350
1294     shown in stick representation (magenta). (C) Schematics of nsp5 expression constructs involving puriﬁcation and solubilization tags (blue), different N-termini and           1351
         additional aa after cleavage (green), and nsp5 (magenta). Cleavage sites are indicated by an arrow. (D, E) An exemplary puriﬁcation is shown for wtnsp5. IMAC (D)
1295     and SEC (E) chromatograms (upper panels) and the corresponding gels (lower panels). Black bars in the chromatograms indicate pooled fractions. Gel samples are as
                                                                                                                                                                                       1352
1296     follows: M: MW standard; pellet/load: pellet/supernatant after cell lysis; FT: IMAC ﬂow-through; imidazole: eluted fractions with linear imidazole gradient; eluate: eluted   1353
1297     SEC fractions from input (load). (F) SEC-MALS analysis with ∼0.5 µg of wtnsp5 without additional aa (wtnsp5, black) with GS (GS-nsp5, blue) and with GHM (GHM-                1354
1298     nsp5, red)) in NMR buffer on a Superdex 75, 10/300 GL (GE Healthcare) column. Horizontal lines indicate fractions of monodisperse nsp5 used for MW determination.             1355
         (G) A SDS-PAGE showing all puriﬁed nsp5 constructs. The arrow indicates nsp5. (H) Exemplary [15N, 1H]-BEST-TROSY spectra measured at 298 K for the dimeric
1299                                                                                                                                                                                   1356
         wtnsp5 (upper spectrum) and monomeric GS-nsp5 (lower spectrum). See Supplementary Table SI4 for technical details regarding this ﬁgure.
1300                                                                                                                                                                                   1357
1301                                                                                                                                                                                   1358
1302                                                                                                                                                                                   1359
1303   machinery (Miknis et al., 2009), possibly targeting the 3’-end                                 Based on the early available crystal structure of SCoV2 nsp9                     1360
1304   stem-loop II (s2m) of the genome (Robertson et al., 2005). nsp9                             (PDB 6W4B, unpublished), we used the 113 aa ﬂ sequence of                           1361
1305   adopts a fold similar to oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding                            nsp9 for our expression construct (Table 1). Production of either                   1362
1306   proteins (Egloff et al., 2004), and structural data consistently                            His- or His-GST-tagged ﬂ nsp9 yielded high amounts of soluble                       1363
1307   uncovered nsp9 to be dimeric in solution (Egloff et al., 2004;                              protein in both natural abundance and 13C- and 15N-labeled                          1364
1308   Sutton et al., 2004; Miknis et al., 2009; Littler et al., 2020). Dimer                      form. Puriﬁcation via the IPRS approach enabled us to separate ﬂ                    1365
1309   formation seems to be a prerequisite for viral replication (Miknis                          nsp9 in different oligomer states. The earliest eluted fraction                     1366
1310   et al., 2009) and inﬂuences RNA-binding (Sutton et al., 2004),                              represented higher oligomers and was contaminated with nucleic                      1367
1311   despite a moderate afﬁnity for RNA in vitro (Littler et al., 2020).                         acids and it was not possible to concentrate above 2 mg/ml. This                    1368


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                               12                                             March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                        SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1369   was different for the subsequently eluting dimeric ﬂ nsp9 fraction,        constructs, which allow coexpression of both nsp14 and                   1426
1370   which had a A260/280 ratio of below 0.7 and could be                       nsp10 (pRSFDuet and pETDuet, respectively). Production of                1427
1371   concentrated to >5 mg/ml (Table 2). The excellent protein                  isolated ﬂ nsp14 was successful, however, with limited yield             1428
1372   quality and stability are supported by the available HSQC                  and stability (Table 2). Expression of the isolated MTase                1429
1373   (Figure 2), and a near-complete backbone assignment (Dudas                 domain resulted in soluble protein with 27.5 kDa mass that               1430
1374   et al., 2021).                                                             was amenable to NMR characterization (Figure 2), although                1431
1375                                                                              only under reducing conditions and in the presence of high               1432
1376   nsp10                                                                      (0.4 M) salt concentration.                                              1433
1377   The last functional protein encoded by ORF1a, nsp10, is an                                                                                          1434
1378   auxiliary factor for both the methyltransferase/exonuclease                nsp15                                                                    1435
1379   nsp14 and the 2′-O-methyltransferase (MTase) nsp16.                        The poly-U-speciﬁc endoribonuclease nsp15 was one of the very            1436
1380   However, it is required for the MTase activity of nsp16                    ﬁrst SCoV2 structures deposited in the PDB [6VWW, (Kim et al.,           1437
1381   (Krafcikova et al., 2020), it confers exonuclease activity to              2020)]. Its function has been suggested to be related to the             1438
1382   nsp14 in the RNA polymerase complex in SCoV (Ma et al.,                    removal of U-rich RNA elements, preventing recognition by                1439
1383   2015). It contains two unusual zinc ﬁnger motifs (Joseph et al.,           the innate immune system (Deng et al., 2017), even though                1440
1384   2006) and was initially proposed to comprise RNA-binding                   the precise mechanism remains to be established. The exact               1441
1385   properties. We generated a construct (Table 1) containing an               role of the three domains (N-terminal, middle, and C-terminal            1442
1386   expression and afﬁnity puriﬁcation tag on the N-terminus as                catalytic domain) also remains to be characterized in more detail        1443
1387   reported for the SCoV variant (Joseph et al., 2006). Importantly,          (Kim et al., 2020). Here, the sufﬁcient yield of ﬂ nsp15 during          1444
1388   additional Zn2+ ions present during expression and puriﬁcation             expression supported puriﬁcation of pure protein, which,                 1445
1389   stabilize the protein signiﬁcantly (Kubatova et al., 2020). The            however, showed limited stability in solution (Table 2).                 1446
1390   yield during isotope-labeling was high (Table 2), and tests in                                                                                      1447
1391   unlabeled rich medium showed the potential for yields exceeding            nsp16                                                                    1448
1392   100 mg/L. These characteristics facilitated in-depth NMR                   The MTase reaction catalyzed by nsp16 is dependent on                    1449
1393   analysis and a backbone assignment (Kubatova et al., 2020).                nsp10 as a cofactor (Krafcikova et al., 2020). In this                   1450
1394                                                                              reaction, the 2’-OH group of nucleotide +1 in genomic                    1451
1395   nsp13                                                                      and subgenomic viral RNA is methylated, preventing                       1452
1396   nsp13 is a conserved ATP-dependent helicase that has been                  recognition by the innate immune system. Since both                      1453
1397   characterized as part of the RNA synthesis machinery by                    nsp14 and nsp16 are in principle susceptible to inhibition               1454
1398   binding to nsp12 (Chen et al., 2020b). It represents an                    by methyltransferase inhibitors, a drug targeting both                   1455
1399   interesting drug target, for which the available structure (PDB            enzymes would be highly desirable (Bouvet et al., 2010).                 1456
1400   6ZSL) serves as an excellent basis (Table 1). The precise                  nsp16 is the last protein being encoded by ORF1ab, and                   1457
1401   molecular function, however, has remained enigmatic since it               only its N-terminus is formed by cleavage by the Mpro                    1458
1402   is not clear whether the RNA unwinding function is required for            nsp5. Employing a similar strategy to that for nsp14,                    1459
1403   making ssRNA accessible for RNA synthesis (Jia et al., 2019) or            nsp16 constructs were designed with the possibility of                   1460
1404   whether it is required for proofreading and backtracking (Chen             nsp10 coexpression. Expression of ﬂ nsp16 resulted in                    1461
1405   et al., 2020b). We obtained pure protein using a standard                  good yields, when expressed both isolated and together                   1462
1406   expression vector, generating a His-SUMO-tagged protein.                   with nsp10. The protein, however, is in either case                      1463
1407   Following Ulp1 cleavage, the protein showed limited protein                unstable in solution and highly dependent on reducing                    1464
1408   stability in the solution (Table 2).                                       buffer conditions (Table 2). The puriﬁcation procedures of               1465
1409                                                                              nsp16 were adapted with minor modiﬁcations from a                        1466
1410   nsp14                                                                      previous X-ray crystallography study (Rosas-Lemus et al.,                1467
1411   nsp14 contains two domains: an N-terminal exonuclease                      2020).                                                                   1468
1412   domain and a C-terminal MTase domain (Ma et al., 2015).                                                                                             1469
1413   The exonuclease domain interacts with nsp10 and provides                   Structural Proteins and Accessory ORFs                                   1470
1414   part of the proofreading function that supports the high                   Besides establishing expression and puriﬁcation protocols for            1471
1415   ﬁdelity of the RNA polymerase complex (Robson et al.,                      the nsps, we also developed protocols and obtained pure mg               1472
1416   2020). Several unusual features, such as the unusual zinc                  quantities of the SCoV2 structural proteins E, M, and N, as well         1473
1417   ﬁnger motifs, set it apart from other DEDD-type                            as literally all accessory proteins. With the exception of the           1474
1418   exonucleases (Chen et al., 2007), which are related to both                relatively well-behaved nucleocapsid (N) protein, SCoV2 E, M,            1475
1419   nsp10 binding and catalytic activity. The MTase domain                     and the remaining accessory proteins represent a class of                1476
1420   modiﬁes the N7 of the guanosine cap of genomic and                         mostly small and relatively poorly characterized proteins,               1477
1421   subgenomic viral RNAs, which is essential for the                          mainly due to their difﬁcult behavior in classical expression            1478
1422   translation of viral proteins (Thoms et al., 2020). The                    systems.                                                                 1479
1423   location of this enzymatic activity within the RNA synthesis                  We used wheat-germ cell-free protein synthesis (WG-                   1480
1424   machinery ensures that newly synthesized RNA is rapidly                    CFPS) for the successful production, solubilization,                     1481
1425   capped and thus stabilized. As a strategy, we used                         puriﬁcation, and, in part, initial NMR spectroscopic                     1482


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org              13                                   March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1483                                                                                                                                                                                1540
1484                                                                                                                                                                                1541
1485                                                                                                                                                                                1542
1486                                                                                                                                                                                1543
1487                                                                                                                                                                                1544
1488                                                                                                                                                                                1545
1489                                                                                                                                                                                1546
1490                                                                                                                                                                                1547
1491                                                                                                                                                                                1548
1492                                                                                                                                                                                1549
1493                                                                                                                                                                                1550
1494                                                                                                                                                                                1551
1495                                                                                                                                                                                1552
1496                                                                                                                                                                                1553
1497                                                                                                                                                                                1554
1498                                                                                                                                                                                1555
1499                                                                                                                                                                                1556
1500                                                                                                                                                                                1557
1501                                                                                                                                                                                1558
1502                                                                                                                                                                                1559
1503                                                                                                                                                                                1560
1504                                                                                                                                                                                1561
1505                                                                                                                                                                                1562
1506                                                                                                                                                                                1563
1507                                                                                                                                                                                1564
1508                                                                                                                                                                                1565
1509                                                                                                                                                                                1566
1510                                                                                                                                                                                1567
1511                                                                                                                                                                                1568
1512                                                                                                                                                                                1569
1513                                                                                                                                                                                1570
1514                                                                                                                                                                                1571
1515                                                                                                                                                                                1572
1516                                                                                                                                                                                1573
1517                                                                                                                                                                                1574
1518                                                                                                                                                                                1575
1519     FIGURE 6 | Cell-free protein synthesis of accessory ORFs and structural proteins E and M. (A) Screening for expression and solubility of different ORFs using small-       1576
1520     scale reactions. The total cell-free reaction (CFS), the pellet after centrifugation, and the supernatant (SN) captured on magnetic beads coated with Strep-Tactin were    1577
1521     analyzed. All tested proteins were synthesized, with the exception of ORF3b. MW, MW standard. (B) Detergent solubilization tests using three different detergents, here    1578
1522     at the example of the M protein, shown by SDS-PAGE and Western Blot. (C) Proteins are puriﬁed in a single step using a Strep-Tactin column. For ORF3a (and also            1579
         for M), a small heat-shock protein of the HSP20 family is copuriﬁed, as identiﬁed by mass spectrometry (see also * in Panel D). (D) SDS-PAGE of the 2H, 13C, 15N-labeled
1523     proteins used as NMR samples. Yields were between 0.2 and 1 mg protein per mL wheat-germ extract used. (E) SEC proﬁles for two ORFs. Left, ORF9b migrates as
                                                                                                                                                                                    1580
1524     expected for a dimer. Right, OFR14 shows large assemblies corresponding to approximately 9 protein units and the DDM detergent micelle. (F) 2D [15N, 1H]-BEST-             1581
1525     TROSY spectrum of ORF9b, recorded at 900 MHz in 1 h at 298 K, on less than 1 mg of protein. See Supplementary Tables SI13–SI19 and Supplementary Tables                    1582
1526     SI19, SI20 for technical and experimental details regarding this ﬁgure.                                                                                                    1583
1527                                                                                                                                                                                1584
1528                                                                                                                                                                                1585
1529   investigation of ORF3a, ORF6, ORF7b, ORF8, ORF9b, and                                     TM helices and a cytosolic β-strand rich domain. SCoV2 ORF3a                       1586
1530   ORF14 accessory proteins, as well as E and M in mg quantities                             is a cation channel, and its structure has been solved by electron                 1587
1531   using the highly efﬁcient translation machinery extracted                                 microscopy in nanodiscs. In SCoV, 3a is a structural component                     1588
1532   from wheat-germs (Figures 6A–D).                                                          and was found in recombinant virus-like particles (Liu et al.,                     1589
1533                                                                                             2014), but is not explicitly needed for their formation. The major                 1590
1534   ORF3a                                                                                     challenge for NMR studies of this largest accessory protein is its                 1591
1535   Protein from ORF3a in SCoV2 corresponds to accessory protein                              size, independent of its employment in solid state or solution                     1592
1536   3a in SCoV, with homology of more than 70% (Table 1). It has                              NMR spectroscopy.                                                                  1593
1537   275 amino acids, and its structure has recently been determined                               As most other accessory proteins described in the                              1594
1538   (Kern et al., 2020). The structure of SCoV2 3a displays a dimer,                          following, ORF3a has been produced using WG-CFPS and                               1595
1539   but it can also form higher oligomers. Each monomer has three                             was expressed in soluble form in the presence of Brij-58                           1596


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                             14                                             March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                            SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1597   (Figure 6C). It is copuriﬁed with a small heat-shock protein                 virion envelope formation in coronaviruses, as M alone is not              1654
1598   of the HSP20 family from the wheat-germ extract. The                         sufﬁcient. Evidence has been presented that M could adopt two              1655
1599   protocol described here is highly similar to that of the                     conformations, elongated and compact, and that the two forms               1656
1600   other cell-free synthesized accessory proteins. Where                        fulﬁll different functions (Neuman et al., 2011). The lack of              1657
1601   NMR spectra have been reported, the protein has been                         more detailed structural information is in part due to its small           1658
1602   produced in a 2 H, 13 C, 15 N uniformly labeled form;                        size, close association with the viral envelope, and a tendency            1659
1603   otherwise, natural abundance amino acids were added to                       to form insoluble aggregates when perturbed (Neuman et al.,                1660
1604   the reaction. The proteins were further afﬁnity-puriﬁed in                   2011). The M protein is readily produced using cell-free                   1661
1605   one step using Strep-Tactin resin, through the Strep-tag II                  synthesis in the presence of detergent; as ORF3a, it is                    1662
1606   fused to their N- or C-terminus. For membrane proteins,                      copuriﬁed with a small heat-shock protein of the HSP20                     1663
1607   protein synthesis and also puriﬁcation were done in the                      family (Figure 6B). Membrane-reconstitution will likely be                 1664
1608   presence of detergent.                                                       necessary to study this protein.                                           1665
1609      About half a milligram of pure protein was generally obtained                                                                                        1666
1610   per mL of extract, and up to 3 ml wheat-germ extract has been                ORF6                                                                       1667
1611   used to prepare NMR samples.                                                 The ORF6 protein is incorporated into viral particles and is               1668
1612                                                                                also released from cells (Huang et al., 2004). It is a small               1669
1613   ORF3b                                                                        protein (61 aa), which has been found to concentrate at the                1670
1614   The ORF3b protein is a putative protein stemming from a                      endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. In a murine                     1671
1615   short ORF (57 aa) with no homology to existing SCoV proteins                 coronavirus model, it was shown that expressing ORF6                       1672
1616   (Chan et al., 2020). Indeed, ORF3b gene products of SCoV2                    increased virulence in mice (Zhao et al., 2009), and results               1673
1617   and SCoV are considerably different, with one of the                         indicate that ORF6 may serve an important role in the                      1674
1618   distinguishing features being the presence of premature stop                 pathogenesis during SCoV infection (Liu et al., 2014). Also,               1675
1619   codons, resulting in the expression of a drastically shortened               it showed to inhibit the expression of certain STAT1-genes                 1676
1620   ORF3b protein (Konno et al., 2020). However, the SCoV2                       critical for the host immune response and could contribute to              1677
1621   nucleotide sequence after the stop codon shows a high                        the immune evasion. ORF6 is expressed very well in WG-                     1678
1622   similarity to the SCoV ORF3b. Different C-terminal                           CFPS; the protein was fully soluble with detergents and                    1679
1623   truncations seem to play a role in the interferon-                           partially soluble without them and was easily puriﬁed in the               1680
1624   antagonistic activity of ORF3b (Konno et al., 2020). ORF3b                   presence of detergent, but less efﬁciently in the absence                  1681
1625   is the only protein that, using WG-CFPS, was not synthesized                 thereof. Solution NMR spectra in the presence of detergent                 1682
1626   at all; i.e., it was neither observed in the total cell-free reaction        display narrow but few resonances, which correspond, in                    1683
1627   nor in supernatant or pellet. This might be due to the                       addition to the C-terminal STREP-tag, to the very                          1684
1628   premature stop codon, which was not considered.                              C-terminal ORF6 protein residues.                                          1685
1629   Constructs of ORF3b thus need to be redesigned.                                                                                                         1686
1630                                                                                ORF7a                                                                      1687
1631   ORF4 (Envelope Protein, E)                                                   SCoV2 protein 7a (121 aa) shows over 85% homology with                     1688
1632   The SCoV2 envelope (E) protein is a small (75 amino acids),                  the SCoV protein 7a. While the SCoV2 7a protein is produced                1689
1633   integral membrane protein involved in several aspects of the                 and retained intracellularly, SCoV protein 7a has also been                1690
1634   virus’ life cycle, such as assembly, budding, envelope formation,            shown to be a structural protein incorporated into mature                  1691
1635   and pathogenicity, as recently reviewed in (Schoeman and                     virions (Liu et al., 2014). 7a is one of the accessory proteins, of        1692
1636   Fielding, 2020). Structural models for SCoV (Surya et al.,                   which a (partial) structure has been determined at high                    1693
1637   2018) and the TM helix of SCoV2 (Mandala et al., 2020) E                     resolution for SCoV2 (PDB 6W37). However, the very                         1694
1638   have been established. The structural models show a pentamer                 N-terminal signal peptide and the C-terminal membrane                      1695
1639   with a TM helix. The C-terminal part is polar, with charged                  anchor, both highly hydrophobic, have not been                             1696
1640   residues interleaved, and is positioned on the membrane surface              determined experimentally yet.                                             1697
1641   in SCoV. E was produced in a similar manner to ORF3a, using the                 Expression of the ORF7a ectodomain (ED) with a GB1 tag                  1698
1642   addition of detergent to the cell-free reaction.                             (Bogomolovas et al., 2009) was expected to produce reasonable              1699
1643                                                                                yields. The IPRS puriﬁcation resulted in a highly stable protein, as       1700
1644   ORF5 (Membrane Glycoprotein, M)                                              evidenced by the NMR data obtained (Figure 7).                             1701
1645   The M protein is the most abundant protein in the viral                                                                                                 1702
1646   envelope and is believed to be responsible for maintaining                   ORF7b                                                                      1703
1647   the virion in its characteristic shape (Huang et al., 2004). M is a          Protein ORF7b is associated with viral particles in a SARS context         1704
1648   glycoprotein and sequence analyses predict three domains: A                  (Liu et al., 2014). Protein 7b is one of the shortest ORFs with 43         1705
1649   C-terminal endodomain, a TM domain with three predicted                      residues. It shows a long hydrophobic stretch, which might                 1706
1650   helices, and a short N-terminal ectodomain. M is essential for               correspond to a TM segment. It shows over 93% sequence                     1707
1651   viral particle assembly. Intermolecular interactions with the                homology with a bat coronavirus 7b protein (Liu et al., 2014).             1708
1652   other structural proteins, N and S to a lesser extent, but most              There, the cysteine residue in the C-terminal part is not                  1709
1653   importantly E (Vennema et al., 1996), seem to be central for                 conserved, which might facilitate structural studies. ORF7b has            1710


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                15                                     March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                             SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1711                                                                                                                                                                            1768
1712                                                                                                                                                                            1769
1713                                                                                                                                                                            1770
1714                                                                                                                                                                            1771
1715                                                                                                                                                                            1772
1716                                                                                                                                                                            1773
1717                                                                                                                                                                            1774
1718                                                                                                                                                                            1775
1719                                                                                                                                                                            1776
1720                                                                                                                                                                            1777
1721                                                                                                                                                                            1778
1722                                                                                                                                                                            1779
1723                                                                                                                                                                            1780
1724                                                                                                                                                                            1781
1725                                                                                                                                                                            1782
1726                                                                                                                                                                            1783
1727                                                                                                                                                                            1784
1728                                                                                                                                                                            1785
1729                                                                                                                                                                            1786
1730                                                                                                                                                                            1787
1731                                                                                                                                                                            1788
1732                                                                                                                                                                            1789
1733                                                                                                                                                                            1790
1734                                                                                                                                                                            1791
1735                                                                                                                                                                            1792
1736                                                                                                                                                                            1793
1737                                                                                                                                                                            1794
1738                                                                                                                                                                            1795
1739                                                                                                                                                                            1796
1740                                                                                                                                                                            1797
1741                                                                                                                                                                            1798
1742                                                                                                                                                                            1799
1743                                                                                                                                                                            1800
1744     FIGURE 7 | 1H, 15N-correlation spectra of investigated structural and accessory proteins. Construct names according to Table 1 are indicated unless ﬂ-proteins         1801
1745     are shown. A representative SDS-PAGE lane with ﬁnal samples is included as inset.                                                                                      1802
1746                                                                                                                                                                            1803
1747                                                                                                                                                                            1804
1748   been synthesized successfully both from bacteria and by WG-                             comprises a hydrophobic peptide at its very N-terminus,                          1805
1749   CFPS in the presence of detergent and could be puriﬁed using a                          likely corresponding to a signal peptide; the remaining                          1806
1750   STREP-tag (Table 2). Due to the necessity of solubilizing agent                         part does not show any speciﬁc sequence features. Its                            1807
1751   and its obvious tendency to oligomerize, structure determination,                       structure has been determined (PDB 7JTL) and shows a                             1808
1752   fragment screening, and interaction studies are challenging.                            similar fold to ORF7a (Flower et al., 2020). In this study,                      1809
1753   However, we were able to record the ﬁrst promising HSQC, as                             ORF8 has been used both with (ﬂ) and without signal peptide                      1810
1754   shown in Figure 7.                                                                      (ΔORF8). We ﬁrst tested the production of ORF8 in E. coli,                       1811
1755                                                                                           but yields were low because of insolubility. Both ORF8                           1812
1756   ORF8                                                                                    versions have then been synthesized in the cell-free system                      1813
1757   ORF 8 is believed to be responsible for the evolution of                                and were soluble in the presence of detergent. Solution NMR                      1814
1758   Betacoronaviruses and their species jumps (Wu et al.,                                   spectra, however, indicate that the protein is forming either                    1815
1759   2016) and to have a role in depressing the host response                                oligomers or aggregates.                                                         1816
1760   (Tan et al., 2020). ORF 8 (121 aa) from SCoV2 does not                                                                                                                   1817
1761   apparently exist in SCoV on the protein level, despite the                              ORF9a (Nucleocapsid Protein, N)                                                  1818
1762   existence of a putative ORF. The sequences of the two                                   The nucleocapsid protein (N) is important for viral genome                       1819
1763   homologs only show limited identity, with the exception of                              packaging (Luo et al., 2006). The multifunctional RNA-                           1820
1764   a small 7 aa segment, where, in SCoV, the glutamate is                                  binding protein plays a crucial role in the viral life cycle                     1821
1765   replaced with an aspartate. It, however, aligns very well                               (Chang et al., 2014) and its domain architecture is highly                       1822
1766   with several coronaviruses endemic to animals, including                                conserved among coronaviruses. It comprises the N-terminal                       1823
1767   Paguma and Bat (Chan et al., 2020). The protein                                         intrinsically disordered region (IDR1), the N-terminal RNA-                      1824


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                           16                                           March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                          SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1825   binding globular domain (NTD), a central serine/arginine- (SR-)             ORF9b                                                                     1882
1826   rich intrinsically disordered linker region (IDR2), the C-terminal          Protein 9b (97 aa) shows 73% sequence homology to the SCoV                1883
1827   dimerization domain (CTD), and a C-terminal intrinsically                   and also to bat virus (bat-SL-CoVZXC21) 9b protein (Chan et al.,          1884
1828   disordered region (IDR3) (Kang et al., 2020).                               2020). The structure of SCoV2 ORF9b has been determined at                1885
1829      N represents a highly promising drug target. We thus focused             high resolution (PDB 6Z4U). Still, a signiﬁcant portion of the            1886
1830   our efforts not exclusively on the NTD and CTD alone, but, in               structure was not found to be well ordered. The protein shows a           1887
1831   addition, also provided protocols for IDR-containing constructs             β-sheet-rich structure and a hydrophobic tunnel, in which bound           1888
1832   within the N-terminal part.                                                 lipid was identiﬁed. How this might relate to membrane binding            1889
1833                                                                               is not fully understood at this point. The differences in sequence        1890
1834   N-Terminal RNA-Binding Globular Domain                                      between SCoV and SCoV2 are mainly located in the very                     1891
1835   The NTD is the RNA-binding domain of the nucleocapsid (Kang                 N-terminus, which was not resolved in the structure (PDB                  1892
1836   et al., 2020). It is embedded within IDRs functions of which have           6Z4U). Another spot of deviating sequence not resolved in the             1893
1837   not yet been deciphered. Recent experimental and bioinformatic              structure is a solvent-exposed loop, which presents a potential           1894
1838   data indicate involvement in liquid-liquid phase separation                 interacting segment. ORF9b has been synthesized as a dimer                1895
1839   (Chen et al., 2020a).                                                       (Figure 6E) using WG-CFPS in its soluble form. Spectra show a             1896
1840       For the NTD, several constructs were designed, also                     well-folded protein, and assignments are underway (Figure 6F).            1897
1841   considering the ﬂanking IDRs (Table 1). In analogy to the                                                                                             1898
1842   available NMR [PDB 6YI3, (Dinesh et al., 2020)] and crystal                 ORF14 (ORF9c)                                                             1899
1843   [PDB 6M3M, (Kang et al., 2020)] structures of the SCoV2                     ORF14 (73 aa) remains, at this point in time, hypothetical. It            1900
1844   NTD, boundaries for the NTD and the NTD-SR domains                          shows 89% homology with a bat virus protein (bat-SL-                      1901
1845   were designed to span residues 44–180 and 44–212,                           CoVZXC21). It shows a highly hydrophobic part in its                      1902
1846   respectively. In addition, an extended IDR1-NTD-IDR2                        C-terminal region, comprising two negatively charged residues             1903
1847   (residues 1–248) was designed, including the N-terminal                     and a charged/polar N-terminus. The C-terminus is likely                  1904
1848   disordered region (IDR1), the NTD domain, and the                           mediating membrane interaction. While ORF14 has been                      1905
1849   central disordered linker (IDR2) that comprises the SR                      synthesized in the wheat-germ cell-free system in the presence            1906
1850   region. His-tagged NTD and NTD-SR were puriﬁed using                        of detergent and solution NMR spectra have been recorded, they            1907
1851   IPRS and yielded approx. 3 mg/L in 15N-labeled minimal                      hint at an aggregated protein (Figure 6E). Membrane-                      1908
1852   medium. High protein quality and stability are supported by                 reconstitution of ORF14 revealed an unstable protein, which               1909
1853   the available HSQC spectra (Figure 7).                                      had been degraded during detergent removal.                               1910
1854       The untagged IDR1-NTD-IDR2 was puriﬁed by IEC and                                                                                                 1911
1855   yielded high amounts of 13C, 15 N-labeled samples of 12 mg/L                ORF10                                                                     1912
1856   for further NMR investigations. The quality of our puriﬁcation is           The ORF10 protein is comprised of 38 aa and is a hypothetical             1913
1857   conﬁrmed by the available HSQC (Figure 7), and a near-                      protein with unknown function (Yoshimoto, 2020). SCoV2                    1914
1858   complete backbone assignment of the two IDRs was achieved                   ORF10 displays 52.4% homology to SCoV ORF9b. The protein                  1915
1859   (manuscript submitted). Notably, despite the structurally and               sequence is rich in hydrophobic residues, rendering expression            1916
1860   dynamically heterogeneous nature of the N protein, the                      and puriﬁcation challenging. Expression of ORF10 as His-Trx-              1917
1861   mentioned N constructs revealed a very good long-term                       tagged or His-SUMO tagged fusion protein was possible;                    1918
1862   stability, as shown in Table 2.                                             however, the ORF10 protein is poorly soluble and shows                    1919
1863                                                                               partial unfolding, even as an uncleaved fusion protein.                   1920
1864   C-Terminal Domain                                                           Analytical SEC hints at oligomerization under the current                 1921
1865   Multiple studies on the SCoV2 CTD, including recent crystal                 conditions.                                                               1922
1866   structures (Ye et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020), conﬁrm the domain                                                                                    1923
1867   as dimeric. Its ability to self-associate seems to be necessary for                                                                                   1924
1868   viral replication and transcription (Luo et al., 2006). In addition,        DISCUSSION                                                                1925
1869   the CTD was shown to, presumably nonspeciﬁcally, bind ssRNA                                                                                           1926
1870   (Zhou et al., 2020).                                                        The ongoing SCoV2 pandemic and its manifestation as the                   1927
1871       Domain boundaries for the CTD were deﬁned to comprise                   COVID-19 disease call for an urgent provision of therapeutics             1928
1872   amino acids 247–364 (Table 1), in analogy to the NMR structure              that will speciﬁcally target viral proteins and their interactions        1929
1873   of the CTD from SCoV (PDB 2JW8, [Takeda et al., 2008)]. Gene                with each other and RNAs, which are crucial for viral                     1930
1874   expression of His- or His-GST-tagged CTD yielded high amounts               propagation. Two “classical” viral targets have been addressed            1931
1875   of soluble protein. Puriﬁcation was achieved via IPRS. The CTD              in comprehensive approaches soon after the outbreak in                    1932
1876   eluted as a dimer judged by its retention volume on the size-               December 2019: the viral protease nsp5 and the RNA-                       1933
1877   exclusion column and yielded good amounts (Table 2). The                    dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) nsp12. While the latter                   1934
1878   excellent protein quality and stability are supported by the                turned out to be a suitable target using the repurposed                   1935
1879   available HSQC spectrum (Figure 7) and a near-complete                      compound Remdesivir (Hillen et al., 2020), nsp5 is undergoing             1936
1880   backbone assignment (Korn et al., 2020b).                                   a broad structure-based screen against a battery of inhibitors in         1937
1881                                                                                                                                                         1938


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org               17                                    March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                              SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



1939   multiple places (Jin et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020), but with, as of        Different Complexities and Challenges                                      1996
1940   yet, the limited outcome for effective medication. Hence, a                    The compilation of protein production protocols, initially guided          1997
1941   comprehensive, reliable treatment of COVID-19 at any stage                     by information from CoV homologs (Table 1), has confronted us              1998
1942   after the infection has remained unsuccessful.                                 with very different levels of complexity. With some prior                  1999
1943      Further viral protein targets will have to be taken into                    expectation toward this, we have shared forces to quickly                  2000
1944   account in order to provide inhibitors with increased                          “work off” the highly conserved soluble and small proteins                 2001
1945   speciﬁcity and efﬁcacy and preparative starting points for                     and soon put focus into the processing of the challenging                  2002
1946   following potential generations of (SARS-)CoVs. Availability                   ones. The difﬁculties in studying this second class of proteins            2003
1947   of those proteins in a recombinant, pure, homogenous, and                      are due to their limited sequence conservation, no prior                   2004
1948   stable form in milligrams is, therefore, a prerequisite for                    information, large molecular weights, insolubility, and so forth.          2005
1949   follow-up applications like vaccination, high-throughput                           The nsp3e NAB represents one example where the available               2006
1950   screening campaigns, structure determination, and mapping                      NMR structure of the SCoV homolog provided a bona ﬁde                      2007
1951   of viral protein interaction networks. We here present, for the                template for selecting initial domain boundaries (Figure 4).               2008
1952   ﬁrst time, a near-complete compendium of SCoV2 protein                         The transfer of information derived from SCoV was                          2009
1953   puriﬁcation protocols that enable the production of large                      straightforward; the transferability included the available                2010
1954   amounts of pure proteins.                                                      protocol for the production of comparable protein amounts                  2011
1955      The COVID19-NMR consortium was launched with the                            and quality, given the high sequence identity. In such cases,              2012
1956   motivation of providing NMR assignments of all SCoV2                           we found ourselves merely to adapt protocols and optimize yields           2013
1957   proteins and RNA elements, and enormous progress has                           based on slightly different expression vectors and E. coli strains.        2014
1958   been made since the outbreak of COVID-19 for both                                  However, in some cases, such transfer was unexpectedly not             2015
1959   components [see Table 2 and (Wacker et al., 2020)].                            successful, e.g., for the short nsp1 GD. Despite intuitive domain          2016
1960   Consequently, we have put our focus on producing proteins                      boundaries with complete local sequence identity seen from the             2017
1961   in stable isotope-labeled forms for NMR-based applications,                    SCoV nsp1 NMR structure, it took considerable efforts to purify            2018
1962   e.g., the site-resolved mapping of interactions with compounds                 an analogous nsp1 construct, which is likely related to the                2019
1963   (Li and Kang, 2020). Relevant to a broad scientiﬁc community,                  impaired stability and solubility caused by a number of                    2020
1964   we here report our protocols to suite perfectly any downstream                 impacting amino acid exchanges within the domain’s ﬂexible                 2021
1965   biochemical or biomedical application.                                         loops. In line with that, currently available structures of SCoV2          2022
1966                                                                                  nsp1 have been obtained by crystallography or cryo-EM and                  2023
1967   Overall Success and Protein Coverage                                           include different buffers. As such, our initial design was                 2024
1968   As summarized in Table 2, we have successfully puriﬁed 80%                     insufﬁcient in terms of taking into account the parameters                 2025
1969   of the SCoV2 proteins either in ﬂ or providing relevant                        mentioned above. However, one needs to consider those                      2026
1970   fragments of the parent protein. Those include most of the                     particular differences between the nsp1 homologs as one of                 2027
1971   nsps, where all of the known/predicted soluble domains have                    the most promising target sites for potential drugs as they                2028
1972   been addressed (Figure 1). For a very large part, we were able                 appear to be hotspots in the CoV evolution and will have                   2029
1973   to obtain protein samples of high purity, homogeneity, and                     essential effects for the molecular networks, both in the virus            2030
1974   fold for NMR-based applications. We would like to point out                    and with the host (Zust et al., 2007; Narayanan et al., 2015; Shen         2031
1975   a number of CoV proteins that, evidenced by their HSQCs,                       et al., 2019; Thoms et al., 2020).                                         2032
1976   for the ﬁrst time, provide access to structural information,                       A special focus was put on the production of the SCoV2 main            2033
1977   e.g., the PLpro nsp3d and nsp3Y. Particularly for the nsp3                     protease nsp5, for which NMR-based screenings are ongoing. The             2034
1978   multidomain protein, we here present soluble samples of                        main protease is critical in terms of inhibitor design as it appears       2035
1979   almost the complete cytosolic region with more than                            under constant selection, and novel mutants remarkably                     2036
1980   120 kDa in the form of excellent 2D NMR spectra                                inﬂuence the structure and biochemistry of the protein (Cross              2037
1981   (Figure 3), a major part of which fully backbone-assigned.                     et al., 2020). In the present study, the expression of the different       2038
1982   We thus enable the exploitation of the largest and most                        constructs allowed us to characterize the protein in both its              2039
1983   enigmatic multifunctional SCoV2 protein through                                monomeric and dimeric forms. Comparison of NMR spectra                     2040
1984   individual domains in solution, allowing us to study their                     reveals that the constructs with additional amino acids (GS and            2041
1985   concerted behavior with single residue resolution. Similarly,                  GHM mutant) display marked structural differences to the wild-             2042
1986   for nsp2, we provide a promising starting point for studying                   type protein while being structurally similar among themselves             2043
1987   the so far neglected, often uncharacterized, and apparently                    (Figure 5H). The addition of two residues (GS) interferes with the         2044
1988   unstructured proteins.                                                         dimerization interface, despite being similar to its native                2045
1989      Driven by the fast-spreading COVID-19, we initially left out                N-terminal amino acids (SGFR). We also introduced an active                2046
1990   proteins that require advanced puriﬁcation procedures (e.g.,                   site mutation that replaces cysteine 145 with alanine (Hsu et al.,         2047
1991   nsp12 and S) or where a priori information was limited (nsp4                   2005). Intriguingly, this active site mutation C145A, known to             2048
1992   and nsp6). This procedure seems justiﬁed with the time-saving                  stabilize the dimerization of the main protease (Chang et al.,             2049
1993   approach of our effort in favor of the less attended proteins.                 2007), supports dimer formation of the GS added construct (GS-             2050
1994   However, we are in the process of collecting protocols for the                 nsp5 C145A) shown by its 2D NMR spectrum overlaying with the               2051
1995   missing proteins.                                                              one of wild-type nsp5 (Supplementary Table SI4). The NMR                   2052


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                  18                                     March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                 SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



2053   results are in line with SEC-MALS analyses (Figure 5F). Indeed,                reconstitution (Fogeron et al., 2015a; Fogeron et al., 2015b; Fogeron            2110
2054   the additional amino acids at the N-terminus shift the                         et al., 2016; Jirasko et al., 2020a; Jirasko et al., 2020b). Reconstitution      2111
2055   dimerization equilibrium toward the monomer, whereas the                       will thus be the next step for many accessory proteins, but also for M           2112
2056   mutation shifts it toward the dimer despite the N-terminal aa                  and E, which were well produced by WG-CFPS. We will also exploit                 2113
2057   additions. This example underlines the need for a thorough and                 the straightforward deuteration in WG-CFPS (David et al., 2018;                  2114
2058   precise construct design and the detailed biochemical and NMR-                 Wang et al., 2019; Jirasko et al., 2020a) that circumvents proton                2115
2059   based characterization of the ﬁnal sample state. The presence of               back-exchange, rendering denaturation and refolding steps obsolete               2116
2060   monomers vs. dimers will play an essential role in the inhibitor               (Tonelli et al., 2011). Nevertheless, the herein presented protocols for         2117
2061   search against SCoV2 proteins, as exempliﬁed by the particularly               the production of non-nsps by WG-CFPS instantly enable their                     2118
2062   attractive nsp5 main protease target.                                          employment in binding studies and screening campaigns and thus                   2119
2063                                                                                  provide a signiﬁcant contribution to soon-to-come studies on                     2120
2064   Exploiting Nonbacterial Expression                                             SCoV2 proteins beyond the classical and convenient drug targets.                 2121
2065   As a particular effort within this consortium, we included the so                  Altogether and judged by the ultimate need of exploiting                     2122
2066   far neglected accessory proteins using a structural genomics                   recombinant SCoV2 proteins in vaccination and highly                             2123
2067   procedure supported by wheat-germ cell-free protein synthesis.                 paralleled screening campaigns, we optimized sample amount,                      2124
2068   This approach allowed us previously to express a variety of                    homogeneity, and long-term stability of samples. Our freely                      2125
2069   difﬁcult viral proteins in our hands (Fogeron et al., 2015a;                   accessible protocols and accompanying NMR spectra now                            2126
2070   Fogeron et al., 2015b; Fogeron et al., 2016; Fogeron et al.,                   offer a great resource to be exploited for the unambiguous and                   2127
2071   2017; Wang et al., 2019; Jirasko et al., 2020a). Within the                    reproducible production of SCoV2 proteins for the intended                       2128
2072   workﬂow, we especially highlight the straightforward                           applications.                                                                    2129
2073   solubilization of the membrane proteins through the addition                                                                                                    2130
2074   of detergent to the cell-free reaction, which allowed the                                                                                                       2131
2075   production of soluble protein in milligram amounts                             DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT                                                      2132
2076   compatible with NMR studies. While home-made extracts                                                                                                           2133
2077   were used here, very similar extracts are available                            The datasets presented in this study can be found in online                   Q152134
2078   commercially (Cell-Free Sciences, Japan) and can thus be                       repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and                       2135
2079   implemented by any lab without prior experience. Also, a                       accession number(s) can be found in the article/                                 2136
2080   major beneﬁt of the WG-CFPS system for NMR studies lies in                     Supplementary Material.                                                          2137
2081   the high efﬁciency and selectivity of isotopic labeling. In contrast                                                                                            2138
2082   to cell-based expression systems, only the protein of interest is                                                                                               2139
2083   produced (Morita et al., 2003), which allows bypassing extensive               AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS                                                          Q162140
2084   puriﬁcation steps. In fact, one-step afﬁnity puriﬁcation is in most                                                                                             2141
2085   cases sufﬁcient, as shown for the different ORFs in this study.                NA, SK, NQ, MD, MN, AB, HS, MH, and AS designed the study,                       2142
2086   Samples could be produced for virtually all proteins, with the                 compiled the protocols and NMR data, and wrote the manuscript.                   2143
2087   exception of the ORF3b construct used. With new recent insight                 All authors contributed coordinative or practical work to the                    2144
2088   into the stop codons present in this ORF, constructs will be                   study. All authors contributed to the creation and collection of                 2145
2089   adapted, which shall overcome the problems of ORF3b                            protein protocols.                                                               2146
2090   production (Konno et al., 2020).                                                                                                                                2147
2091       For two ORFs, 7b and 8, we exploited a paralleled production                                                                                                2148
2092   strategy, i.e., both in bacteria and via cell-free synthesis. For those        FUNDING                                                                       Q182149
2093   challenging proteins, we were, in principle, able to obtain pure                                                                                             Q172150
2094   samples from either expression system. However, for ORF7b, we                  This work was supported by Goethe University (Corona funds),                     2151
2095   found a strict dependency on detergents for follow-up work from                the DFG-funded CRC: “Molecular Principles of RNA-Based                           2152
2096   both approaches. ORF8 showed signiﬁcantly better solubility                    Regulation,” DFG infrastructure funds (project numbers:                          2153
2097   when produced in WG extracts compared to bacteria. This                        277478796, 277479031, 392682309, 452632086, 70653611), the                       2154
2098   shows the necessity of parallel routes to take, in particular, for             state of Hesse (BMRZ), the Fondazione CR Firenze (CERM), and                     2155
2099   the understudied, biochemically nontrivial ORFs that might                     the IWB-EFRE-program 20007375. This project has received                         2156
2100   represent yet unexplored but highly speciﬁc targets to consider                funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research                          2157
2101   in the treatment of COVID-19.                                                  and innovation program under Grant Agreement No. 871037.                         2158
2102       Downstream structural analysis of ORFs produced with CFPS                  AS is supported by DFG Grant SCHL 2062/2-1 and by the JQYA                       2159
2103   remains challenging but promising progress is being made in the                at Goethe through project number 2019/AS01. Work in the lab of                   2160
2104   light of SCoV2. Some solution NMR spectra show the expected                    KV was supported by a CoRE grant from the University of New                      2161
2105   number of signals with good resolution (e.g., ORF9b). As expected,             Hampshire. The FLI is a member of the Leibniz Association                        2162
2106   however, most proteins cannot be straightforwardly analyzed by                 (WGL) and ﬁnancially supported by the Federal Government of                      2163
2107   solution NMR in their current form, as they exhibit too large objects          Germany and the State of Thuringia. Work in the lab of RM was                    2164
2108   after insertion into micelles and/or by inherent oligomerization. Cell-        supported by NIH (2R01EY021514) and NSF (DMR-2002837).                           2165
2109   free synthesized proteins can be inserted into membranes through               BN-B was supported by the NSF GRFP. MC was supported by                          2166


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                  19                                        March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                       SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



2167   NIH (R25 GM055246 MBRS IMSD), and MS-P was supported by                                        DynamicAssemblies. Work in the CA lab was supported by                                        2224
2168   the HHMI Gilliam Fellowship. Work in the labs of KJ and KT was                                 Patto per il Sud della Regione Siciliana–CheMISt grant (CUP                                   2225
2169   supported by Latvian Council of Science Grant No. VPPCOVID                                     G77B17000110001). Part of this work used the platforms of the                                 2226
2170   2020/1-0014. Work in the UPAT’s lab was supported by the                                       Grenoble Instruct-ERIC center (ISBG; UMS 3518 CNRS-CEA-                                       2227
2171   INSPIRED (MIS 5002550) project, which is implemented under                                     UGA-EMBL) within the Grenoble Partnership for Structural                                      2228
2172   the Action “Reinforcement of the Research and Innovation                                       Biology (PSB), supported by FRISBI (ANR-10-INBS-05-02)                                        2229
2173   Infrastructure,” funded by the Operational Program                                             and GRAL, ﬁnanced within the University Grenoble Alpes                                        2230
2174   “Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation” (NSRF                                       graduate school (Ecoles Universitaires de Recherche) CBH-                                     2231
2175   2014–2020) and coﬁnanced by Greece and the EU (European                                        EUR-GS (ANR-17-EURE-0003).                                                                    2232
2176   Regional Development Fund) and the FP7 REGPOT CT-2011-                                                                                                                                       2233
2177   285950–“SEE-DRUG” project (purchase of UPAT’s 700 MHz                                                                                                                                        2234
2178   NMR equipment). Work in the CM-G lab was supported by                                          ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                                               2235
2179   the Helmholtz society. Work in the lab of AB was supported by                                                                                                                                2236
2180   the CNRS, the French National Research Agency (ANR, NMR-                                       The authors thank Leonardo Gonnelli and Katharina                                             2237
2181   SCoV2- ORF8), the Fondation de la Recherche Médicale (FRM,                                     Targaczewski for the valuable technical assistance. IBS                                       2238
2182   NMR-SCoV2-ORF8), and the IR-RMN-THC Fr3050 CNRS.                                               acknowledges integration into the Interdisciplinary Research                                  2239
2183   Work in the lab of BM was supported by the Swiss National                                      Institute of Grenoble (IRIG CEA). They acknowledge the                                        2240
2184   Science Foundation (Grant number 200020_188711), the                                           Advanced Technologies Network Center of the University of                                     2241
2185   Günthard Stiftung für Physikalische Chemie, and the ETH                                        Palermo to support infrastructures.                                                           2242
2186   Zurich. Work in the labs of AB and BM was supported by a                                                                                                                                     2243
2187   common grant from SNF (grant 31CA30_196256). This work                                                                                                                                       2244
2188   was supported by the ETH Zurich, the grant ETH 40 18 1, and the                                SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL                                                                     Q202245
2189   grant Krebsliga KFS 4903 08 2019. Work in the lab of the IBS                                                                                                                                 2246
2190   Grenoble was supported by the Agence Nationale de                                              The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at:                           2247
2191   Recherche (France) RA-COVID SARS2NUCLEOPROTEIN                                                 https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmolb.2021.653148/                               2248
2192   and European Research Council Advanced Grant                                                   full#supplementary-material.                                                                  2249
2193                                                                                                                                                                                                2250
2194                                                                                                                                                                                                2251
                                                                                                      Chen, H., Cui, Y., Han, X., Hu, W., Sun, M., Zhang, Y., et al. (2020a). Liquid-liquid
2195   REFERENCES                                                                                                                                                                                   2252
                                                                                                         phase separation by SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein and RNA. Cell Res. 30,
2196                                                                                                     1143. doi:10.1038/s41422-020-00408-2                                                       2253
2197   Almeida, M. S., Johnson, M. A., Herrmann, T., Geralt, M., and Wüthrich, K.                     Chen, J., Malone, B., Llewellyn, E., Grasso, M., Shelton, P. M. M., Olinares, P. D. B.,       2254
2198      (2007). Novel beta-barrel fold in the nuclear magnetic resonance structure of                  et al. (2020b). Structural basis for helicase-polymerase coupling in the SARS-             2255
2199      the replicase nonstructural protein 1 from the severe acute respiratory                        CoV-2 replication-transcription complex. Cell 182 (6), 1560–1573. doi:10.1016/             2256
          syndrome coronavirus. J. Virol. 81 (7), 3151–3161. doi:10.1128/JVI.01939-06                    j.cell.2020.07.033
2200                                                                                                                                                                                                2257
       Anand, K., Ziebuhr, J., Wadhwani, P., Mesters, J. R., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2003).               Chen, P., Jiang, M., Hu, T., Liu, Q., Chen, X. S., and Guo, D. (2007). Biochemical
2201      Coronavirus main proteinase (3CLpro) structure: basis for design of anti-SARS                  characterization of exoribonuclease encoded by SARS coronavirus. J. Biochem.               2258
2202      drugs. Science 300 (5626), 1763–1767. doi:10.1126/science.1085658                              Mol. Biol. 40 (5), 649–655. doi:10.5483/bmbrep.2007.40.5.649                               2259
2203   Bogomolovas, J., Simon, B., Sattler, M., and Stier, G. (2009). Screening of fusion             Chen, Y., Savinov, S. N., Mielech, A. M., Cao, T., Baker, S. C., and Mesecar, A. D.           2260
2204      partners for high yield expression and puriﬁcation of bioactive viscotoxins.                   (2015). X-ray structural and functional studies of the three tandemly linked               2261
          Protein Expr. Purif. 64 (1), 16–23. doi:10.1016/j.pep.2008.10.003                              domains of non-structural protein 3 (nsp3) from murine hepatitis virus reveal
2205   Bojkova, D., Klann, K., Koch, B., Widera, M., Krause, D., Ciesek, S., et al. (2020).              conserved functions. J. Biol. Chem. 290 (42), 25293–25306. doi:10.1074/jbc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2262
2206      Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2-infected host cells reveals therapy targets. Nature                   M115.662130                                                                                2263
2207      583 (7816), 469–472. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2332-7                                          Cornillez-Ty, C. T., Liao, L., Yates, J. R., 3rd, Kuhn, P., and Buchmeier, M. J. (2009).      2264
2208   Bouvet, M., Debarnot, C., Imbert, I., Selisko, B., Snijder, E. J., Canard, B., et al.             Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nonstructural protein 2 interacts            2265
2209      (2010). In vitro reconstitution of SARS-coronavirus mRNA cap methylation.                      with a host protein complex involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and                       2266
          PLoS Pathog. 6 (4), e1000863. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000863                                 intracellular signaling. J. Virol. 83 (19), 10314–10318. doi:10.1128/JVI.00842-09
2210   Cantini, F., Banci, L., Altincekic, N., Bains, J. K., Dhamotharan, K., Fuks, C., et al.        Cross, T. J., Takahashi, G. R., Diessner, E. M., Crosby, M. G., Farahmand, V.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2267
2211      (2020). (1)H, (13)C, and (15)N backbone chemical shift assignments of the apo                  Zhuang, S., et al. (2020). Sequence characterization and molecular modeling of             2268
2212      and the ADP-ribose bound forms of the macrodomain of SARS-CoV-2 non-                           clinically relevant variants of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease. Biochemistry 59              2269
2213      structural protein 3b. Biomol. NMR Assign. 14 (2), 339–346. doi:10.1007/                       (39), 3741–3756. doi:10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00462                                           2270
          s12104-020-09973-4                                                                          David, G., Fogeron, M. L., Schledorn, M., Montserret, R., Haselmann, U., Penzel, S.,
2214                                                                                                                                                                                                2271
       Chan, J. F., Kok, K. H., Zhu, Z., Chu, H., To, K. K., Yuan, S., et al. (2020). Genomic            et al. (2018). Structural studies of self-assembled subviral particles: combining
2215      characterization of the 2019 novel human-pathogenic coronavirus isolated                       cell-free expression with 110 kHz MAS NMR spectroscopy. Angew. Chem. Int.                  2272
2216      from a patient with atypical pneumonia after visiting Wuhan. Emerg. Microbes                   Ed. Engl. 57 (17), 4787–4791. doi:10.1002/anie.201712091                                   2273
2217      Infect. 9 (1), 221–236. doi:10.1080/22221751.2020.1719902                                   Davies, J. P., Almasy, K. M., McDonald, E. F., and Plate, L. (2020). Comparative              2274
2218   Chang, C. K., Hou, M. H., Chang, C. F., Hsiao, C. D., and Huang, T. H. (2014). The                multiplexed interactomics of SARS-CoV-2 and homologous coronavirus non-                    2275
          SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein--forms and functions. Antivir. Res.                      structural proteins identiﬁes unique and shared host-cell dependencies. bioRxiv
2219                                                                                                                                                                                                2276
          103, 39–50. doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.12.009                                                [Epub ahead of print]. doi:10.1101/2020.07.13.201517
2220   Chang, H. P., Chou, C. Y., and Chang, G. G. (2007). Reversible unfolding of the                Deng, X., Hackbart, M., Mettelman, R. C., O’Brien, A., Mielech, A. M., Yi, G., et al.         2277
2221      severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus main protease in                                 (2017). Coronavirus nonstructural protein 15 mediates evasion of dsRNA                     2278
2222      guanidinium chloride. Biophys. J. 92 (4), 1374–1383. doi:10.1529/                              sensors and limits apoptosis in macrophages. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.                 2279
2223      biophysj.106.091736                                                                            114 (21), E4251–E4260. doi:10.1073/pnas.1618310114                                         2280


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                                  20                                               March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                          SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



2281   Dinesh, D. C., Chalupska, D., Silhan, J., Koutna, E., Nencka, R., Veverka, V., et al.                 implications for assembly and vaccine production. J. Virol. 78 (22),                   2338
2282      (2020). Structural basis of RNA recognition by the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid                         12557–12565. doi:10.1128/JVI.78.22.12557-12565.2004                                    2339
          phosphoprotein. PLoS Pathog. 16 (12), e1009100. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.                      Hurst, K. R., Koetzner, C. A., and Masters, P. S. (2013). Characterization of a
2283      1009100                                                                                            critical interaction between the coronavirus nucleocapsid protein and
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2340
2284   Dudas, F. D., Puglisi, R., Korn, S. M., Alfano, C., Kelly, G., Monaca, E., et al. (2021).             nonstructural protein 3 of the viral replicase-transcriptase complex. J. Virol.        2341
2285      Backbone chemical shift spectral assignments of coronavirus-2 non-structural                       87 (16), 9159–9172. doi:10.1128/JVI.01275-13                                           2342
2286      protein nsp9. Biomol. NMR Assign. 2021, 1–10. doi:10.1007/s12104-020-                          Ishida, T., and Kinoshita, K. (2007). PrDOS: prediction of disordered protein              2343
          09992-1                                                                                            regions from amino acid sequence. Nucleic Acids Res. 35, W460–W464. doi:10.
2287                                                                                                                                                                                                2344
       Egloff, M. P., Ferron, F., Campanacci, V., Longhi, S., Rancurel, C., Dutartre, H.,                    1093/nar/gkm363
2288      et al. (2004). The severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus replicative                   Jia, Z., Yan, L., Ren, Z., Wu, L., Wang, J., Guo, J., et al. (2019). Delicate structural   2345
2289      protein nsp9 is a single-stranded RNA-binding subunit unique in the RNA                            coordination of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus Nsp13 upon           2346
2290      virus world. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101 (11), 3792–3796. doi:10.1073/pnas.                  ATP hydrolysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 47 (12), 6538–6550. doi:10.1093/nar/gkz409          2347
2291      0307877101                                                                                     Jiang, H. W., Li, Y., Zhang, H. N., Wang, W., Yang, X., Qi, H., et al. (2020). SARS-       2348
       Esposito, D., Mehalko, J., Drew, M., Snead, K., Wall, V., Taylor, T., et al. (2020).                  CoV-2 proteome microarray for global proﬁling of COVID-19 speciﬁc IgG and
2292                                                                                                                                                                                                2349
          Optimizing high-yield production of SARS-CoV-2 soluble spike trimers for                           IgM responses. Nat. Commun. 11 (1), 3581. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17488-8
2293      serology assays. Protein Expr. Purif. 174, 105686. doi:10.1016/j.pep.2020.105686               Jin, Z., Du, X., Xu, Y., Deng, Y., Liu, M., Zhao, Y., et al. (2020). Structure of Mpro     2350
2294   Finkel, Y., Mizrahi, O., Nachshon, A., Weingarten-Gabbay, S., Morgenstern, D.,                        from SARS-CoV-2 and discovery of its inhibitors. Nature 582 (7811), 289–293.           2351
2295      Yahalom-Ronen, Y., et al. (2020). The coding capacity of SARS-CoV-2. Nature                        doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2223-y                                                          2352
2296      589, 125. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2739-1                                                        Jirasko, V., Lakomek, N. A., Penzel, S., Fogeron, M. L., Bartenschlager, R., Meier, B.     2353
       Flower, T. G., Buffalo, C. Z., Hooy, R. M., Allaire, M., Ren, X., and Hurley, J. H.                   H., et al. (2020a). Proton-detected solid-state NMR of the cell-free synthesized
2297      (2020). Structure of SARS-CoV-2 ORF8, a rapidly evolving coronavirus protein                       α-helical transmembrane protein NS4B from hepatitis C virus. Chembiochem.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2354
2298      implicated in immune evasion. bioRxiv [Epub ahead of print]. doi:10.1101/                          21 (10), 1453–1460. doi:10.1002/cbic.201900765                                         2355
2299      2020.08.27.270637                                                                              Jirasko, V., Lends, A., Lakomek, N. A., Fogeron, M. L., Weber, M. E., Malär, A. A.,        2356
2300   Fogeron, M. L., Badillo, A., Jirasko, V., Gouttenoire, J., Paul, D., Lancien, L., et al.              et al. (2020b). Dimer organization of membrane-associated NS5A of hepatitis C          2357
2301      (2015a). Wheat germ cell-free expression: two detergents with a low critical                       virus as determined by highly sensitive 1 H-detected solid-state NMR. Angew.           2358
          micelle concentration allow for production of soluble HCV membrane proteins.                       Chem. Int. Ed. 60 (10), 5339–5347. doi:10.1002/anie.202013296
2302      Protein Expr. Purif. 105, 39–46. doi:10.1016/j.pep.2014.10.003                                 Johnson, M. A., Chatterjee, A., Neuman, B. W., and Wüthrich, K. (2010). SARS
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2359
2303   Fogeron, M. L., Badillo, A., Penin, F., and Böckmann, A. (2017). Wheat germ cell-                     coronavirus unique domain: three-domain molecular architecture in solution             2360
2304      free overexpression for the production of membrane proteins. Methods Mol.                          and RNA binding. J. Mol. Biol. 400 (4), 724–742. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2010.05.027         2361
2305      Biol. 1635, 91–108. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-7151-0_5                                            Joseph, J. S., Saikatendu, K. S., Subramanian, V., Neuman, B. W., Brooun, A.,              2362
       Fogeron, M. L., Jirasko, V., Penzel, S., Paul, D., Montserret, R., Danis, C., et al.                  Grifﬁth, M., et al. (2006). Crystal structure of nonstructural protein 10 from the
2306                                                                                                                                                                                                2363
          (2016). Cell-free expression, puriﬁcation, and membrane reconstitution for                         severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus reveals a novel fold with two
2307      NMR studies of the nonstructural protein 4B from hepatitis C virus. J. Biomol.                     zinc-binding motifs. J. Virol. 80 (16), 7894–7901. doi:10.1128/JVI.00467-06            2364
2308      NMR 65 (2), 87–98. doi:10.1007/s10858-016-0040-2                                               Kamitani, W., Narayanan, K., Huang, C., Lokugamage, K., Ikegami, T., Ito, N., et al.       2365
2309   Fogeron, M. L., Paul, D., Jirasko, V., Montserret, R., Lacabanne, D., Molle, J., et al.               (2006). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp1 protein suppresses          2366
2310      (2015b). Functional expression, puriﬁcation, characterization, and membrane                        host gene expression by promoting host mRNA degradation. Proc. Natl. Acad.             2367
          reconstitution of non-structural protein 2 from hepatitis C virus. Protein Expr.                   Sci. U.S.A. 103 (34), 12885–12890. doi:10.1073/pnas.0603144103
2311                                                                                                                                                                                                2368
          Purif. 116, 1–6. doi:10.1016/j.pep.2015.08.027                                                 Kang, S., Yang, M., Hong, Z., Zhang, L., Huang, Z., Chen, X., et al. (2020). Crystal
2312   Frick, D. N., Virdi, R. S., Vuksanovic, N., Dahal, N., and Silvaggi, N. R. (2020).                    structure of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein RNA binding domain reveals                2369
2313      Molecular basis for ADP-ribose binding to the Mac1 domain of SARS-                                 potential unique drug targeting sites. Acta Pharm. Sin. B 10 (7), 1228–1238.           2370
2314      CoV-2 nsp3. Biochemistry 59 (28), 2608–2615. doi:10.1021/acs.biochem.                              doi:10.1016/j.apsb.2020.04.009                                                         2371
2315      0c00309                                                                                        Kern, D. M., Sorum, B., Mali, S. S., Hoel, C. M., Sridharan, S., Remis, J. P., et al.      2372
       Gallo, A., Tsika, A. C., Fourkiotis, N. K., Cantini, F., Banci, L., Sreeramulu, S., et al.            (2020). Cryo-EM structure of the SARS-CoV-2 3a ion channel in lipid
2316      (2020). 1H, 13C and 15N chemical shift assignments of the SUD domains of                           nanodiscs. bioRxiv 17, 156554. doi:10.1101/2020.06.17.156554
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2373
2317      SARS-CoV-2 non-structural protein 3c: “the N-terminal domain-SUD-N”.                           Khan, M. T., Zeb, M. T., Ahsan, H., Ahmed, A., Ali, A., Akhtar, K., et al. (2020).         2374
2318      Biomol. NMR Assign. 2020, 1–5. doi:10.1007/s12104-020-09987-y                                      SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid and Nsp3 binding: an in silico study. Arch.                    2375
2319   Gao, Y., Yan, L., Huang, Y., Liu, F., Zhao, Y., Cao, L., et al. (2020). Structure of the              Microbiol. 203, 59. doi:10.1007/s00203-020-01998-6                                     2376
2320      RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from COVID-19 virus. Science 368 (6492),                          Kim, Y., Jedrzejczak, R., Maltseva, N. I., Wilamowski, M., Endres, M., Godzik, A.,         2377
          779–782. doi:10.1126/science.abb7498                                                               et al. (2020). Crystal structure of Nsp15 endoribonuclease NendoU from SARS-
2321   Gordon, D. E., Jang, G. M., Bouhaddou, M., Xu, J., Obernier, K., White, K. M., et al.                 CoV-2. Protein Sci. 29 (7), 1596–1605. doi:10.1002/pro.3873
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2378
2322      (2020). A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals targets for drug                          Kirchdoerfer, R. N., and Ward, A. B. (2019). Structure of the SARS-CoV nsp12               2379
2323      repurposing. Nature 583 (7816), 459–468. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2286-9                             polymerase bound to nsp7 and nsp8 co-factors. Nat. Commun. 10 (1), 2342.               2380
2324   Graham, R. L., Sims, A. C., Brockway, S. M., Baric, R. S., and Denison, M. R. (2005).                 doi:10.1038/s41467-019-10280-3                                                         2381
          The nsp2 replicase proteins of murine hepatitis virus and severe acute                         Konkolova, E., Klima, M., Nencka, R., and Boura, E. (2020). Structural analysis of
2325                                                                                                                                                                                                2382
          respiratory syndrome coronavirus are dispensable for viral replication.                            the putative SARS-CoV-2 primase complex. J. Struct. Biol. 211 (2), 107548.
2326      J. Virol. 79 (21), 13399–13411. doi:10.1128/JVI.79.21.13399-13411.2005                             doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2020.107548                                                          2383
2327   Hagemeijer, M. C., Monastyrska, I., Grifﬁth, J., van der Sluijs, P., Voortman, J., van            Konno, Y., Kimura, I., Uriu, K., Fukushi, M., Irie, T., Koyanagi, Y., et al. (2020).       2384
2328      Bergen en Henegouwen, P. M., et al. (2014). Membrane rearrangements                                SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b is a potent interferon antagonist whose activity is                   2385
2329      mediated by coronavirus nonstructural proteins 3 and 4. Virology 458–459,                          increased by a naturally occurring elongation variant. Cell Rep. 32 (12),              2386
          125–135. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2014.04.027                                                           108185. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108185
2330                                                                                                                                                                                                2387
       Hillen, H. S., Kokic, G., Farnung, L., Dienemann, C., Tegunov, D., and Cramer, P.                 Korn, S. M., Dhamotharan, K., Fürtig, B., Hengesbach, M., Löhr, F., Qureshi, N. S.,
2331      (2020). Structure of replicating SARS-CoV-2 polymerase. Nature 584 (7819),                         et al. (2020a). 1H, 13C, and 15N backbone chemical shift assignments of the            2388
2332      154–156. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2368-8                                                             nucleic acid-binding domain of SARS-CoV-2 non-structural protein 3e.                   2389
2333   Hsu, M. F., Kuo, C. J., Chang, K. T., Chang, H. C., Chou, C. C., Ko, T. P., et al.                    Biomol. NMR Assign. 14 (2), 329–333. doi:10.1007/s12104-020-09971-6                    2390
2334      (2005). Mechanism of the maturation process of SARS-CoV 3CL protease.                          Korn, S. M., Lambertz, R., Fürtig, B., Hengesbach, M., Löhr, F., Richter, C., et al.       2391
          J. Biol. Chem. 280 (35), 31257–31266. doi:10.1074/jbc.M502577200                                   (2020b). 1H, 13C, and 15N backbone chemical shift assignments of the
2335   Huang, Y., Yang, Z. Y., Kong, W. P., and Nabel, G. J. (2004). Generation of                           C-terminal dimerization domain of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2392
2336      synthetic severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus pseudoparticles:                           Biomol. NMR Assign. 2020, 1–7. doi:10.1007/s12104-020-09995-y                          2393
2337                                                                                                                                                                                                2394


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                                     21                                               March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                               SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



2395   Krafcikova, P., Silhan, J., Nencka, R., and Boura, E. (2020). Structural analysis of the             Neuman, B. W. (2016). Bioinformatics and functional analyses of coronavirus                    2452
2396       SARS-CoV-2 methyltransferase complex involved in RNA cap creation bound                             nonstructural proteins involved in the formation of replicative organelles.                 2453
           to sinefungin. Nat. Commun. 11 (1), 3717. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-17495-9                            Antivir. Res. 135, 97–107. doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2016.10.005
2397   Kubatova, N., Qureshi, N. S., Altincekic, N., Abele, R., Bains, J. K., Ceylan, B., et al.            Oostra, M., Hagemeijer, M. C., van Gent, M., Bekker, C. P., te Lintelo, E. G., Rottier,
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2454
2398       (2020). 1H, 13C, and 15N backbone chemical shift assignments of coronavirus-                        P. J., et al. (2008). Topology and membrane anchoring of the coronavirus                    2455
2399       2 non-structural protein Nsp10. Biomol. NMR Assign. 2020, 1–7. doi:10.1007/                         replication complex: not all hydrophobic domains of nsp3 and nsp6 are                       2456
2400       s12104-020-09984-1                                                                                  membrane spanning. J. Virol. 82 (24), 12392–12405. doi:10.1128/JVI.                         2457
       Kusov, Y., Tan, J., Alvarez, E., Enjuanes, L., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2015). A                             01219-08
2401                                                                                                                                                                                                       2458
           G-quadruplex-binding macrodomain within the “SARS-unique domain” is                              Oostra, M., te Lintelo, E. G., Deijs, M., Verheije, M. H., Rottier, P. J., and de Haan,
2402       essential for the activity of the SARS-coronavirus replication-transcription                        C. A. (2007). Localization and membrane topology of coronavirus                             2459
2403       complex. Virology 484, 313–322. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2015.06.016                                     nonstructural protein 4: involvement of the early secretory pathway in                      2460
2404   Leao, J. C., Gusmao, T. P. L., Zarzar, A. M., Leao Filho, J. C., Barkokebas Santos de                   replication. J. Virol. 81 (22), 12323–12336. doi:10.1128/JVI.01506-07                       2461
2405       Faria, A., Morais Silva, I. H., et al. (2020). Coronaviridae-old friends, new                    Pavesi, A. (2020). New insights into the evolutionary features of viral overlapping            2462
           enemy! Oral Dis. 2020, 13447. doi:10.1111/odi.13447                                                 genes by discriminant analysis. Virology 546, 51–66. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2020.
2406                                                                                                                                                                                                       2463
       Lei, J., Kusov, Y., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2018). Nsp3 of coronaviruses: structures and                    03.007
2407       functions of a large multi-domain protein. Antivir. Res. 149, 58–74. doi:10.1016/                Robertson, M. P., Igel, H., Baertsch, R., Haussler, D., Ares, M., Jr., and Scott, W. G.        2464
2408       j.antiviral.2017.11.001                                                                             (2005). The structure of a rigorously conserved RNA element within the                      2465
2409   Li, Q., and Kang, C. (2020). A practical perspective on the roles of solution NMR                       SARS virus genome. PLoS Biol. 3 (1), e5. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.                          2466
2410       spectroscopy in drug discovery. Molecules 25 (13), 2974. doi:10.3390/                               0030005                                                                                     2467
           molecules25132974                                                                                Robson, F., Khan, K. S., Le, T. K., Paris, C., Demirbag, S., Barfuss, P., et al. (2020).
2411   Littler, D. R., Gully, B. S., Colson, R. N., and Rossjohn, J. (2020). Crystal structure of              Coronavirus RNA proofreading: molecular basis and therapeutic targeting.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2468
2412       the SARS-CoV-2 non-structural protein 9, Nsp9. iScience 23 (7), 101258. doi:10.                     Mol. Cel 79 (5), 710–727. doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2020.07.027                                  2469
2413       1016/j.isci.2020.101258                                                                          Rosas-Lemus, M., Minasov, G., Shuvalova, L., Inniss, N. L., Kiryukhina, O.,                    2470
2414   Liu, D. X., Fung, T. S., Chong, K. K., Shukla, A., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2014).                           Wiersum, G., et al. (2020). The crystal structure of nsp10-nsp16                            2471
2415       Accessory proteins of SARS-CoV and other coronaviruses. Antivir. Res. 109,                          heterodimer from SARS-CoV-2 in complex with S-adenosylmethionine.                           2472
           97–109. doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.06.013                                                         bioRxiv [Epub ahead of print]. doi:10.1101/2020.04.17.047498
2416   Luo, H., Chen, J., Chen, K., Shen, X., and Jiang, H. (2006). Carboxyl terminus of                    Salvi, N., Bessa, L. M., Guseva, S., Camacho-Zarco, A., Maurin, D., Perez, L. M.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2473
2417       severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein: self-                           et al. (2021). 1H, 13C and 15N backbone chemical shift assignments of SARS-                 2474
2418       association analysis and nucleic acid binding characterization. Biochemistry                        CoV-2 nsp3a. Biomol. NMR Assign. 2021, 1–4. doi:10.1007/s12104-020-                         2475
2419       45 (39), 11827–11835. doi:10.1021/bi0609319                                                         10001-8                                                                                     2476
       Ma, Y., Wu, L., Shaw, N., Gao, Y., Wang, J., Sun, Y., et al. (2015). Structural basis                Schoeman, D., and Fielding, B. C. (2020). Is there a link between the pathogenic
2420                                                                                                                                                                                                       2477
           and functional analysis of the SARS coronavirus nsp14-nsp10 complex. Proc.                          human coronavirus envelope protein and immunopathology? A review of
2421       Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112 (30), 9436–9441. doi:10.1073/pnas.1508686112                            the literature. Front. Microbiol. 11, 2086. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2020.02086                    2478
2422   Mandala, V. S., McKay, M. J., Shcherbakov, A. A., Dregni, A. J., Kolocouris, A., and                 Schubert, K., Karousis, E. D., Jomaa, A., Scaiola, A., Echeverria, B., Gurzeler, L. A.,        2479
2423       Hong, M. (2020). Structure and drug binding of the SARS-CoV-2 envelope                              et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 Nsp1 binds the ribosomal mRNA channel to inhibit                  2480
2424       protein transmembrane domain in lipid bilayers. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27,                         translation. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27 (10), 959–966. doi:10.1038/s41594-020-              2481
           1202. doi:10.1038/s41594-020-00536-8                                                                0511-8
2425                                                                                                                                                                                                       2482
       Miknis, Z. J., Donaldson, E. F., Umland, T. C., Rimmer, R. A., Baric, R. S., and                     Serrano, P., Johnson, M. A., Almeida, M. S., Horst, R., Herrmann, T., Joseph, J. S.,
2426       Schultz, L. W. (2009). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp9                           et al. (2007). Nuclear magnetic resonance structure of the N-terminal domain of             2483
2427       dimerization is essential for efﬁcient viral growth. J. Virol. 83 (7), 3007–3018.                   nonstructural protein 3 from the severe acute respiratory syndrome                          2484
2428       doi:10.1128/JVI.01505-08                                                                            coronavirus. J. Virol. 81 (21), 12049–12060. doi:10.1128/JVI.00969-07                       2485
2429   Mompean, M., Trevino, M. A., and Laurents, D. V. (2020). Towards targeting the                       Serrano, P., Johnson, M. A., Chatterjee, A., Neuman, B. W., Joseph, J. S.,                     2486
           disordered SARS-CoV-2 nsp2 C-terminal region: partial structure and                                 Buchmeier, M. J., et al. (2009). Nuclear magnetic resonance structure of the
2430       dampened mobility revealed by NMR spectroscopy. bioRxiv [Epub ahead of                              nucleic acid-binding domain of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2487
2431       print]. doi:10.1101/2020.11.09.374173                                                               nonstructural protein 3. J. Virol. 83 (24), 12998–13008. doi:10.1128/JVI.                   2488
2432   Morita, E. H., Sawasaki, T., Tanaka, R., Endo, Y., and Kohno, T. (2003). A wheat                        01253-09                                                                                    2489
2433       germ cell-free system is a novel way to screen protein folding and function.                     Shen, Z., Wang, G., Yang, Y., Shi, J., Fang, L., Li, F., et al. (2019). A conserved region     2490
2434       Protein Sci. 12 (6), 1216–1221. doi:10.1110/ps.0241203                                              of nonstructural protein 1 from alphacoronaviruses inhibits host gene                       2491
       Narayanan, K., Huang, C., Lokugamage, K., Kamitani, W., Ikegami, T., Tseng, C.                          expression and is critical for viral virulence. J. Biol. Chem. 294 (37),
2435       T., et al. (2008). Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp1 suppresses                    13606–13618. doi:10.1074/jbc.RA119.009713
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2492
2436       host gene expression, including that of type I interferon, in infected cells.                    Shin, D., Mukherjee, R., Grewe, D., Bojkova, D., Baek, K., Bhattacharya, A., et al.            2493
2437       J. Virol. 82 (9), 4471–4479. doi:10.1128/JVI.02472-07                                               (2020). Papain-like protease regulates SARS-CoV-2 viral spread and innate                   2494
2438   Narayanan, K., Ramirez, S. I., Lokugamage, K. G., and Makino, S. (2015).                                immunity. Nature 587 (7835), 657–662. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2601-5                         2495
           Coronavirus nonstructural protein 1: common and distinct functions in the                        Snijder, E. J., Bredenbeek, P. J., Dobbe, J. C., Thiel, V., Ziebuhr, J., Poon, L. L., et al.
2439                                                                                                                                                                                                       2496
           regulation of host and viral gene expression. Virus. Res. 202, 89–100. doi:10.                      (2003). Unique and conserved features of genome and proteome of SARS-
2440       1016/j.virusres.2014.11.019                                                                         coronavirus, an early split-off from the coronavirus group 2 lineage. J. Mol. Biol.         2497
2441   Nelson, C. W., Ardern, Z., Goldberg, T. L., Meng, C., Kuo, C. H., Ludwig, C., et al.                    331 (5), 991–1004. doi:10.1016/s0022-2836(03)00865-9                                        2498
2442       (2020). Dynamically evolving novel overlapping gene as a factor in the SARS-                     Surya, W., Li, Y., and Torres, J. (2018). Structural model of the SARS coronavirus E           2499
2443       CoV-2 pandemic. Elife 9, 59633. doi:10.7554/eLife.59633                                             channel in LMPG micelles. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Biomembr. 1860 (6),                        2500
       Netzer, W. J., and Hartl, F. U. (1997). Recombination of protein domains facilitated                    1309–1317. doi:10.1016/j.bbamem.2018.02.017
2444                                                                                                                                                                                                       2501
           by co-translational folding in eukaryotes. Nature 388 (6640), 343–349. doi:10.                   Sutton, G., Fry, E., Carter, L., Sainsbury, S., Walter, T., Nettleship, J., et al. (2004).
2445       1038/41024                                                                                          The nsp9 replicase protein of SARS-coronavirus, structure and functional                    2502
2446   Neuman, B. W., Joseph, J. S., Saikatendu, K. S., Serrano, P., Chatterjee, A., Johnson, M. A.,           insights. Structure 12 (2), 341–353. doi:10.1016/j.str.2004.01.016                          2503
2447       et al. (2008). Proteomics analysis unravels the functional repertoire of coronavirus             Takai, K., Sawasaki, T., and Endo, Y. (2010). Practical cell-free protein synthesis            2504
2448       nonstructural protein 3. J. Virol. 82 (11), 5279–5294. doi:10.1128/JVI.02631-07                     system using puriﬁed wheat embryos. Nat. Protoc. 5 (2), 227–238. doi:10.1038/               2505
       Neuman, B. W., Kiss, G., Kunding, A. H., Bhella, D., Baksh, M. F., Connelly, S., et al.                 nprot.2009.207
2449       (2011). A structural analysis of M protein in coronavirus assembly and                           Takeda, M., Chang, C. K., Ikeya, T., Güntert, P., Chang, Y. H., Hsu, Y. L., et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2506
2450       morphology. J. Struct. Biol. 174 (1), 11–22. doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2010.11.021                          (2008). Solution structure of the c-terminal dimerization domain of SARS                    2507
2451                                                                                                                                                                                                       2508


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                                        22                                                 March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


       Altincekic et al.                                                                                                                          SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



2509      coronavirus nucleocapsid protein solved by the SAIL-NMR method. J. Mol.                       Ye, Q., West, A. M. V., Silletti, S., and Corbett, K. D. (2020). Architecture and self-         2566
2510      Biol. 380 (4), 608–622. doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2007.11.093                                            assembly of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein. Protein Sci. 29, 1890. doi:10.              2567
       Tan, J., Vonrhein, C., Smart, O. S., Bricogne, G., Bollati, M., Kusov, Y., et al. (2009).           1002/pro.3909
2511      The SARS-unique domain (SUD) of SARS coronavirus contains two                                 Yin, W., Mao, C., Luan, X., Shen, D. D., Shen, Q., Su, H., et al. (2020). Structural
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2568
2512      macrodomains that bind G-quadruplexes. Plos Pathog. 5 (5), e1000428.                             basis for inhibition of the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from SARS-CoV-2                     2569
2513      doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000428                                                                 by remdesivir. Science 368 (6498), 1499–1504. doi:10.1126/science.abc1560                    2570
2514   Tan, Y., Schneider, T., Leong, M., Aravind, L., and Zhang, D. (2020). Novel                      Yoshimoto, F. K. (2020). The proteins of severe acute respiratory syndrome                      2571
          immunoglobulin domain proteins provide insights into evolution and                               coronavirus-2 (SARS CoV-2 or n-COV19), the cause of COVID-19. Protein
2515                                                                                                                                                                                                    2572
          pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2-related viruses. mBio 11 (3). doi:10.1128/                            J. 39 (3), 198–216. doi:10.1007/s10930-020-09901-4
2516      mBio.00760-20                                                                                 Zhang, L., Lin, D., Sun, X., Curth, U., Drosten, C., Sauerhering, L., et al. (2020).            2573
2517   Thoms, M., Buschauer, R., Ameismeier, M., Koepke, L., Denk, T., Hirschenberger,                     Crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease provides a basis for design of                 2574
2518      M., et al. (2020). Structural basis for translational shutdown and immune                        improved α-ketoamide inhibitors. Science 368 (6489), 409–412. doi:10.1126/                   2575
2519      evasion by the Nsp1 protein of SARS-CoV-2. Science 369 (6508), 1249–1255.                        science.abb3405                                                                              2576
          doi:10.1126/science.abc8665                                                                   Zhao, J., Falcón, A., Zhou, H., Netland, J., Enjuanes, L., Pérez Breña, P., et al. (2009).
2520                                                                                                                                                                                                    2577
       Tonelli, M., Singarapu, K. K., Makino, S., Sahu, S. C., Matsubara, Y., Endo, Y., et al.             Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus protein 6 is required for optimal
2521      (2011). Hydrogen exchange during cell-free incorporation of deuterated amino                     replication. J. Virol. 83 (5), 2368–2373. doi:10.1128/JVI.02371-08                           2578
2522      acids and an approach to its inhibition. J. Biomol. NMR 51 (4), 467–476. doi:10.              Zhou, R., Zeng, R., Von Brunn, A., and Lei, J. (2020). Structural characterization of           2579
2523      1007/s10858-011-9575-4                                                                           the C-terminal domain of SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein. Mol. Biomed. 1                     2580
2524   Tonelli, M., Rienstra, C., Anderson, T. K., Kirchdoerfer, R., and Henzler-Wildman,                  (2), 1–11. doi:10.1186/s43556-020-00001-4                                                    2581
          K. (2020). 1H, 13C, and 15N backbone and side chain chemical shift                            Züst, R., Cervantes-Barragán, L., Kuri, T., Blakqori, G., Weber, F., Ludewig, B., et al.
2525      assignments of the SARS-CoV-2 non-structural protein 7. Biomol. NMR                              (2007). Coronavirus non-structural protein 1 is a major pathogenicity factor:
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2582
2526      Assign. 2020, 1–5. doi:10.1007/s12104-020-09985-0                                                implications for the rational design of coronavirus vaccines. PLoS Pathog. 3 (8),            2583
2527   Tvarogová, J., Madhugiri, R., Bylapudi, G., Ferguson, L. J., Karl, N., and Ziebuhr, J.              e109. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.0030109                                                       2584
2528      (2019). Identiﬁcation and characterization of a human coronavirus 229E                                                                                                                        2585
2529      nonstructural protein 8-associated RNA 3′-terminal adenylyltransferase                        Conﬂict of Interest: CH was employed by Signals GmbH & Co. KG.                               Q192586
          activity. J. Virol. 93 (12), e00291–e00319. doi:10.1128/JVI.00291-19
2530   Ullrich, S., and Nitsche, C. (2020). The SARS-CoV-2 main protease as drug                        The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2587
2531      target. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 30 (17), 127377. doi:10.1016/j.bmcl.2020.                    any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential                 2588
2532      127377                                                                                        conﬂict of interest.                                                                            2589
2533   Vennema, H., Godeke, G. J., Rossen, J. W., Voorhout, W. F., Horzinek, M. C.,                                                                                                                     2590
          Opstelten, D. J., et al. (1996). Nucleocapsid-independent assembly of                         Copyright © 2021 Altincekic, Korn, Qureshi, Dujardin, Ninot-Pedrosa, Abele, Abi
2534                                                                                                                                                                                                    2591
          coronavirus-like particles by co-expression of viral envelope protein                         Saad, Alfano, Almeida, Alshamleh, Cardoso de Amorim, Anderson, Ano Bom,
2535      genes. EMBO J. 15 (8), 2020–2028. doi:10.1002/j.1460-2075.1996.                               Anorma, Bains, Bax, Blackledge, Blechar, Böckmann, Brigandat, Bula, Bütikofer,                  2592
2536      tb00553.x                                                                                     Camacho Zarco, Carlomagno, Caruso, Ceylan, Chaikuad, Chu, Cole, Crosby,                         2593
2537   Wacker, A., Weigand, J. E., Akabayov, S. R., Altincekic, N., Bains, J. K., Banijamali,           Dhamotharan, Felli, Ferner, Fleischmann, Fogeron, Fourkiotis, Fuks, Fürtig,                     2594
2538      E., et al. (2020). Secondary structure determination of conserved SARS-CoV-2                  Gallo, Gande, Gerez, Ghosh, Gomes-Neto, Gorbatyuk, Guseva, Hacker, Häfner,                      2595
          RNA elements by NMR spectroscopy. Nucleic Acids Res. 48, 12415. doi:10.1093/                  Hargittay, Henzler-Wildman, Hoch, Hohmann, Hutchison, Jaudzems, de Jesus,
2539                                                                                                                                                                                                    2596
          nar/gkaa1013                                                                                  Jovic, Kaderli, Kalniņš, Kaņepe, Kirchdoerfer, Kirkpatrick, Knapp, Krishnathas,
2540   Wang, S., Fogeron, M. L., Schledorn, M., Dujardin, M., Penzel, S., Burdette, D., et al.          Kutz, zur Lage, Lambertz, Lang, Laurents, Lecoq, Linhard, Löhr, Malki,                          2597
2541      (2019). Combining cell-free protein synthesis and NMR into a tool to study                    Mamigonian Bessa, Martin, Matzel, Maurin, McNutt, Mebus-Antunes, Meier,                         2598
2542      capsid assembly modulation. Front. Mol. Biosci. 6, 67. doi:10.3389/fmolb.2019.                Meiser, Mompeán, Monaca, Montserret, Moreno Perez, Moser, Muhle-Goll,                           2599
2543      00067                                                                                         Neves-Martins, Ni, Norton-Baker, Pierattelli, Pontoriero, Pustovalova,                          2600
       Wolff, G., Limpens, R. W. A. L., Zevenhoven-Dobbe, J. C., Laugks, U., Zheng, S., de              Ohlenschläger, Orts, T. Da Poian, Pyper, Richter, Riek, Robertson, S. Pinheiro,
2544      Jong, A. W. M., et al. (2020). A molecular pore spans the double membrane of                  Sabbatella, Salvi, Saxena, Schulte, Schiavina, Schwalbe, Silber, da Silva Almeida,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2601
2545      the coronavirus replication organelle. Science 369 (6509), 1395–1398. doi:10.                 Sprague-Piercy, Spyroulias, Sreeramulu, Tants, Tars, Torres, Töws, Treviño, Trucks,            2602
2546      1126/science.abd3629                                                                          Tsika, Varga, Wang, Weber, Weigand, Wiedemann, Wirmer-Bartoschek, Wirtz                         2603
2547   Wu, F., Zhao, S., Yu, B., Chen, Y. M., Wang, W., Song, Z. G., et al. (2020). A new               Martin, Zehnder, Hengesbach and Schlundt. This is an open-access article                     Q222604
2548      coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature 579                    distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC                     2605
          (7798), 265–269. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2008-3                                                BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
2549   Wu, Z., Yang, L., Ren, X., Zhang, J., Yang, F., Zhang, S., et al. (2016). ORF8-related           original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2606
2550      genetic evidence for Chinese horseshoe bats as the source of human severe acute               publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.            2607
2551      respiratory syndrome coronavirus. J. Infect. Dis. 213 (4), 579–583. doi:10.1093/              No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with                    2608
2552      infdis/jiv476                                                                                 these terms.                                                                                    2609
2553                                                                                                                                                                                                    2610
2554                                                                                                                                                                                                    2611
2555                                                                                                                                                                                                    2612
2556                                                                                                                                                                                                    2613
2557                                                                                                                                                                                                    2614
2558                                                                                                                                                                                                    2615
2559                                                                                                                                                                                                    2616
2560                                                                                                                                                                                                    2617
2561                                                                                                                                                                                                    2618
2562                                                                                                                                                                                                    2619
2563                                                                                                                                                                                                    2620
2564                                                                                                                                                                                                    2621
2565                                                                                                                                                                                                    2622


       Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org                                    23                                                March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


          Altincekic et al.                                                                                SARS-CoV-2 Protein Puriﬁcation Protocols



2623Q21   GLOSSARY                                                        IPRS IMAC-protease cleavage-reverse IMAC-SEC;                               2680
2624                                                                      M Membrane protein                                                          2681
2625      aa Amino acid                                                                                                                               2682
2626                                                                      MERS Middle East Respiratory Syndrome                                       2683
2627      BEST Band-selective excitation short-transient                  MHV Murine hepatitis virus                                                  2684
2628      BMRB Biomagnetic resonance databank                             Mpro Main protease                                                          2685
2629      CFPS Cell-free protein synthesis                                                                                                            2686
                                                                          MTase Methyltransferase
2630                                                                                                                                                  2687
          CoV Coronavirus
2631                                                                      N Nucleocapsid protein                                                      2688
2632      CTD C-terminal domain                                           NAB Nucleic acid–binding domain                                             2689
2633      DEDD Asp-Glu-Glu-Asp                                                                                                                        2690
                                                                          nsp Nonstructural protein
2634                                                                                                                                                  2691
          DMS Dimethylsulfate                                             NTD N-terminal domain
2635                                                                                                                                                  2692
2636      E Envelope protein                                              PLpro Papain-like protease                                                  2693
2637      ED Ectodomain                                                   RdRP RNA-dependent RNA polymerase                                           2694
2638      ﬂ Full-length                                                                                                                               2695
2639                                                                      S Spike protein                                                             2696
2640      GB1 Protein G B1 domain                                         SARS Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome                                      2697
2641      GD Globular domain                                              SEC Size-exclusion chromatography                                           2698
2642      GF Gel ﬁltration                                                                                                                            2699
                                                                          SUD SARS unique domain
2643                                                                                                                                                  2700
2644
          GST Glutathione-S-transferase                                   SUMO Small ubiquitin-related modiﬁer                                        2701
2645      His Hisx-tag                                                    TEV Tobacco etch virus                                                      2702
2646      HSP Heat-shock protein                                          TM Transmembrane                                                            2703
2647                                                                                                                                                  2704
          HSQC Heteronuclear single quantum coherence                     TROSY Transverse relaxation-optimized spectroscopy
2648                                                                                                                                                  2705
2649      IDP Intrinsically disordered protein                            Trx Thioredoxin                                                             2706
2650      IDR Intrinsically disordered region                             Ubl Ubiquitin-like domain                                                   2707
2651      IEC Ion exchange chromatography                                                                                                             2708
                                                                          Ulp1 Ubiquitin-like speciﬁc protease 1
2652                                                                                                                                                  2709
2653      IMAC Immobilized metal ion afﬁnity chromatography               WG Wheat-germ.                                                              2710
2654                                                                                                                                                  2711
2655                                                                                                                                                  2712
2656                                                                                                                                                  2713
2657                                                                                                                                                  2714
2658                                                                                                                                                  2715
2659                                                                                                                                                  2716
2660                                                                                                                                                  2717
2661                                                                                                                                                  2718
2662                                                                                                                                                  2719
2663                                                                                                                                                  2720
2664                                                                                                                                                  2721
2665                                                                                                                                                  2722
2666                                                                                                                                                  2723
2667                                                                                                                                                  2724
2668                                                                                                                                                  2725
2669                                                                                                                                                  2726
2670                                                                                                                                                  2727
2671                                                                                                                                                  2728
2672                                                                                                                                                  2729
2673                                                                                                                                                  2730
2674                                                                                                                                                  2731
2675                                                                                                                                                  2732
2676                                                                                                                                                  2733
2677                                                                                                                                                  2734
2678                                                                                                                                                  2735
2679                                                                                                                                                  2736


          Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences | www.frontiersin.org   24                                      March 2021 | Volume 8 | Article 653148


                                       C
  Annexe 3 : 1H, 13C and 15N Backbone chemical
  shift assignments of the N-terminal and central
intrinsically disordered domains of SARS-CoV-2
                                    nucleoprotein




                      184


Biomolecular NMR Assignments
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12104-021-10014-x

    ARTICLE



1
 H, 13C and 15N Backbone chemical shift assignments of the n‑terminal
and central intrinsically disordered domains of SARS‑CoV‑2
nucleoprotein
Serafima Guseva1 · Laura Mariño Perez1 · Aldo Camacho‑Zarco1 · Luiza Mamigonian Bessa1                      · Nicola Salvi1 ·
Anas Malki1 · Damien Maurin1 · Martin Blackledge1

Received: 11 November 2020 / Accepted: 7 March 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021


Abstract
The nucleoprotein (N) from SARS-CoV-2 is an essential cofactor of the viral replication transcription complex and as such
represents an important target for viral inhibition. It has also been shown to colocalize to the transcriptase-replicase com-
plex, where many copies of N decorate the viral genome, thereby protecting it from the host immune system. N has also
been shown to phase separate upon interaction with viral RNA. N is a 419 amino acid multidomain protein, comprising two
folded, RNA-binding and dimerization domains spanning residues 45–175 and 264–365 respectively. The remaining 164
amino acids are predicted to be intrinsically disordered, but there is currently no atomic resolution information describing
their behaviour. Here we assign the backbone resonances of the first two intrinsically disordered domains (N1, spanning
residues 1–44 and N3, spanning residues 176–263). Our assignment provides the basis for the identification of inhibitors
and functional and interaction studies of this essential protein.

Keywords SARS-CoV-2 · Nucleoprotein · Intrinsically disordered protein · NMR · COVID-19 · Dynamics · Relaxation


Biological context                                                      2007; McBride et al. 2014), thereby providing protection
                                                                        from the host immune system, and is essential for regula-
The spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus             tion of viral gene transcription (Wu et al. 2014). N is also
2 (SARS-CoV-2) represents a serious threat to the stability             produced in abundance in infected cells and is an important
of human societies throughout the world. In order to eradi-             marker for infection. In order to identify possible avenues
cate the disease, it is necessary to foster research aimed at           targeting the essential roles of N in the viral cycle, it is
the development of vaccines or effective antiviral inhibitors.          important to understand the structure and function of this
The establishment of effective therapeutic strategies requires          complex protein at atomic resolution.
the identification of molecular targets against which inhibi-              N is a 419 amino acid multi-domain protein, comprising
tory strategies can be developed.                                       folded, RNA-binding (N2) and dimerization (N4) domains
   The nucleoprotein (N) of SARS-CoV-2 is a crucial com-                spanning residues 45–175 and 266–365 respectively (Chang
ponent of the replication machinery, localizing to the viral            et al. 2014). N2 has been described using both X-ray crys-
replicase–transcriptase complex (4, 5, 7–9). Beta-coronavi-             tallography (Kang et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2020) and NMR
ral N encapsidates the viral genome within a nucleocapsid,              spectroscopy (Dinesh et al. 2020). The dimerization domain
formed from multiple copies of the protein (Zúñiga et al.               N4 has been described using X-ray crystallography (Ye et al.
                                                                        2020; Peng et al. 2020) and N has been shown to form higher
                                                                        order oligomers via N4 (Ye et al. 2020; Zeng et al. 2020;
Serafima Guseva and Laura Mariño Perez have contributed equally
to this work.                                                           Lutomski et al. 2020). The remaining 164 amino acids com-
                                                                        prising N1, N3 and N5 are predicted to be intrinsically disor-
* Martin Blackledge                                                     dered, but despite evidence that these domains are essential
  martin.blackledge@ibs.fr                                              for function in the related Mouse Hepatitis virus (Keane
1
     University Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS,                         and Giedroc 2013), there is currently no atomic resolution
     38000 Grenoble, France                                             information describing their behaviour in solution. Nuclear


                                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                                      Vol.:(0123456789)


                                                                                                                  S. Guseva et al.


magnetic resonance is the ideal tool for studying the con-       purification. After protease cleavage, the proteins contain
formational behaviour of highly dynamic or intrinsically         N-terminal GRR- extensions. For 15N and 13C isotope
disordered proteins (Jensen et al. 2014).                        labelling, cells were grown in M9-minimal medium sup-
   Here we present the assignment of the backbone reso-          plemented with 15N–NH4–Cl and 13C6–d–glucose (1 and
nances of the first two intrinsically disordered domains         2 g/L respectively).
(N1, spanning residues 1–44 and N3, the central disor-              Both nucleoprotein constructs (N123, comprising resi-
dered domain, spanning residues 176–265). The N3 IDR             dues 1–263 and N3, comprising residues 175–263) were
(175–263) comprises a serine-arginine (SR) rich domain that      cloned into a pESPRIT vector between the AatII and NotI
is phosphorylated in virions, a modification that plays a role   cleavage sites with H ­ is 8-tag and TEV cleavage sites at
in both function and localization of SARS-CoV-1 N (Peng          the N-terminus (GenScript Biotech Netherlands). Trans-
et al. 2008). N5 is thought to contribute to the oligomeriza-    formation was performed by heat-shock and proteins
tion of N in SARS-CoV-1 (Lo et al. 2013).                        were expressed in E. coli BL21(DE3) (Novagen) for 5 h
   Recent studies used single molecule FRET and molecular        at 37°C after induction at an optical density of 0.6 with
modelling (Cubuk et al. 2020) to describe the global con-        1 mM isopropyl–b–d–thiogalactopyranoside. Cells were
formational behaviour of N1 and N3. Peptides representing        harvested by centrifugating at 5000 rpm, resuspended in
the SR region of N3 in its phosphorylated and non-phospho-
rylated forms were also described using NMR spectroscopy
(Savastano et al. 2020). Mass spectrometry has also revealed
a number of auto-catalytic sites in N, two of which are pre-
sent in N3 (Lu et al. 2020; Lutomski et al. 2020).
   N from SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to undergo liq-
uid–liquid phase separation (LLPS) upon mixing with
RNA (Cubuk et al. 2020; Savastano et al. 2020; Chen et al.
2020; Iserman et al. 2020; Perdikari et al. 2020; Carlson
et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2020; Jack et al. 2020). The formation
of membraneless condensates by colocalization of com-
ponents involved in viral replication in liquid droplets is
prevalent in negative sense single strand RNA viruses, such
as rabies (Nikolic et al. 2017), measles (Zhou et al. 2019;
Guseva et al. 2020), and Nipah (Ringel et al. 2019). It is not
yet known which interactions are responsible for LLPS in
SARS-CoV-2, but it is highly likely that the intrinsically
disordered domains are involved in this process. Moreover,
N2 and N3 were shown to be essential for phase separation
with RNA (Lu et al. 2020).
   Here, we present backbone resonance assignment and
NMR relaxation of two domains (N1 and N3) of N, provid-
ing data prerequisite for characterisation of the functional
modes of this enigmatic protein, screening of interaction
partners and detailed mapping of interactions.


Methods and experiments

Sample preparation

The primary sequence of N from SARS-CoV-2 was
extracted from NCBI genome entry NC_045512.2 [Gen-
Bank entry MN908947.3 (Wu et al. 2014)]. Commercially
synthesized genes (Genscript Biotech) were codon-opti-
                                                                 Fig. 1  1H–15N HSQC of N3 (175–263) from SARS-CoV-2. The
mized for expression in Escherichia coli and subcloned           spectrum was acquired on an 850 MHz spectrometer at 298 K at a
in a pET21b(+) vector. Hexa-histidine and TEV-cleavage           concentration of 150 μM in 50 mM Na-phosphate, pH 6.0, 250 mM
tags were included at the N-terminus to facilitate protein       NaCl. Assigned backbone 1H–15N peaks are labelled


13


1
H, 13C and 15N Backbone chemical shift assignments of the n-terminal and central…

Fig. 2  1H–15N BEST-TROSY
of N123 (1–263) from SARS-
CoV-2. The spectrum was
acquired on a 950 MHz spec-
trometer at 298 K at a concen-
tration of 150 μM in 50 mM
Na-phosphate, pH 6.5, 250 mM
NaCl. Backbone 1H–15N peaks
assigned in this study are
labelled, resonances transferred
from assignment of N3 (Fig. 1)
are starred. The disperse
signals from N2 for which an
assignment is already available
(Dinesh et al. 2020) are present
but have not been labelled




20 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 500 mM NaCl buffer, lysed by                       of weak additional peaks of the helical region and connec-
sonication, and centrifugated again at 18,000 rpm at 4°C.                  tion with those already assigned. All spectra were processed
The supernatant was subjected to standard Ni purification.                 using NMRPipe (Delaglio et al. 1995) and analyzed using
Proteins were eluted with 20 mM Tris (pH 8), 500 mM                        CCPNMR Analysis Assign (Skinner et al. 2016) and NMR-
NaCl and 500 mM imidazole. Samples were then dialysed                      FAM-SPARKY (Lee et al. 2015). Assignment was further
against 20 mM Tris (pH 8), 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT                           assisted by comparison to BMRB entry 34511 (Dinesh et al.
at room temperature overnight. Following TEV cleavage,                     2020) of the N-terminal RNA-binding domain of the SARS-
samples were concentrated and subjected to size exclu-                     CoV-2 nucleoprotein, specifically nucleoprotein residues 44
sion chromatography (SEC, Superdex 75/200) in 50 mM                        to 180 (N2).
Na-Phosphate (pH 6.5), 250 mM NaCl 2 mM DTT buffer
(NMR buffer). Proteins were studied at 600 and 150 μM                      Assignments and data deposition
for N3 and 0.91 mM for N123.
                                                                           The HSQC of N3 is typical of an intrinsically disordered
                                                                           protein (Fig. 1). Most peaks in N3 are reproduced in the
NMR experiments                                                            spectrum of N123, that also reveals the presence of the
                                                                           folded RNA-binding domain N2, in addition to disordered
BEST and BEST-TROSY (BT) double and triple resonance                       peaks from N1 (intensity of peaks from the first 15 residues
assignment experiments, including BEST-HNCA, BEST                          of N3 were reduced in N123, probably due to the proximity
HN(CO)CA, BT-HNCO (Lescop et al. 2007; Solyom et al.                       with N2). The assignment of N2 has been published (Dinesh
2013), were recorded on 15N,13C-labeled samples at 298 K                   et al. 2020), and assignment of N1 in N123 (Fig. 2) and
using Bruker Avance III spectrometers equipped with a                      N3 in its isolated form and in the context of N123 were
cryoprobe at 1H frequencies of 600 and 850 MHz. R1rho                      accomplished using standard triple resonance approaches.
relaxation experiments (Lakomek et al. 2012) were recorded                 A high percentage of resonances could be assigned in N3
at 150 μM protein concentration and 298 K in a 50 mM                       (84% 1HN, 84% 15NH, 82% 13Cα and 76% 13C) and N1 in the
Na-Phosphate (pH 6.5), 250 mM NaCl 2 mM DTT buffer                         context of N123 (94% 1HN, 94% 15NH, 100% 13Cα, 57% 13Cβ
at 950 MHz.                                                                and 100% 13C). These assignments have been deposited in
   Residues 217–224 and 231–235 of N3 were assigned                        the Biological Magnetic Resonance Databank (BMRB ID:
using a deuterated 13C 15N labelled sample at 300 µM.                      50557, comprising backbone resonance assignment of N3
BEST-HNCA, BEST-HN(CO)CA with one increment in 15N                         and 50558, comprising backbone resonance assignment of
dimension were recorded at 850 MHz, allowing detection


                                                                                                                            13


                                                                                                                   S. Guseva et al.

Fig. 3  Analysis of chemical
shifts and relaxation rates for
N1 and N3 from SARS-CoV-2.
a Secondary ­Cα chemical shifts
for the disordered residues in
N3. b Secondary ­Cα chemical
shifts for the disordered resi-
dues in N123 that are observed
in triple resonance assignment
experiments. c Rotating frame
relaxation rates measured in
N123. Measurements were
made at 950 MHz at 298 K
using sample concentration of
150 μM. Residues from N2 are
not shown




N1 and of resolved resonances in N3, both in the context         N (176–185), which is not seen experimentally, although
of N123).                                                        there is overlap of predicted helical propensity (< 30%
                                                                 helix predicted to stretch from 213 to 225) in the vicinity
Secondary structural propensity and dynamics                     of experimentally observed helical propensity. Studies of
                                                                 isolated peptides (Savastano et al. 2020) also suggested a
Resonance assignment of the two domains confirms the             helical propensity in the SR region which is not seen here.
disordered nature of N1 and N3 (Figs. 1 and 2). The linker          Assignment of the backbone resonances of the N-termi-
region (N3) connecting the two folded domains (N2 and            nal domain of N (N1) within the N123 construct (Fig. 2)
N4), comprises intrinsically disordered SR-rich and polar        reveals the presence of an intrinsically disordered chain
termini, flanking a central hydrophobic strand that exhibits a   with no detectable secondary structural propensity and only
pronounced helical propensity (> 30% from 216 to 224 with        very slight differences around residue 248 compared to free
near 100% helical population from position 220) (Fig. 3).        N3. Note that a number of resonances that were visible in
Assignment of 5 residues at the centre of this region was not    N3 were not assigned in N123, most probably due to short
possible, possibly due to dimerization mediated by the helix.    relaxation times experienced in the vicinity of the helical
This region is also predicted to form a hydrophobic helix in     motif that limits transfer of magnetization in triple resonance
SARS-CoV (Chang et al. 2009). Recent simulations (Cubuk          experiments. Nevertheless putative transfer of assignment
et al. 2020) also proposed the presence of a weakly (< 20%)      was proposed on the basis of the 15N–1H correlation spec-
helical motif in the SR region at the N-terminal region of       tra of N3 and N123 (starred resonances in Fig. 2). Spin


13


1
H, 13C and 15N Backbone chemical shift assignments of the n-terminal and central…

relaxation measured in N123 confirms the highly dynamic                         that promote nucleocapsid assembly. Sci Adv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
nature of N1 and N3 in the context of the folded RNA bind-                      1126/​sciadv.​aaz70​95
                                                                           Iserman C, Roden C, Boerneke M et al (2020) Specific viral RNA
ing domain N2 (Fig. 3), with relaxation rates in the expected                   drives the SARS CoV-2 nucleocapsid to phase separate. Bio Rxiv.
range for a disordered domain (Adamski et al. 2019), with                       https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​06.​11.​147199
the exception of the helical element in N3 and three consecu-              Jack A, Ferro LS, Trnka MJ et al (2020) SARS CoV-2 nucleocapsid
tive residues in N1 (R14-I15-T16) that both show elevated                       protein forms condensates with viral genomic RNA. Bio Rxiv.
                                                                                https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​09.​14.​295824
rates.                                                                     Jensen MR, Zweckstetter M, Huang J, Blackledge M (2014) Explor-
   In conclusion, NMR backbone assignment and prelimi-                          ing free-energy landscapes of intrinsically disordered proteins at
nary relaxation studies provide the basis for further NMR                       atomic resolution using NMR spectroscopy. Chem Rev 114:6632–
studies of this important drug target, providing the tools nec-                 6660. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1021/​cr400​688u
                                                                           Kang S, Yang M, Hong Z et al (2020) Crystal structure of SARS-
essary for the identification of inhibitors and for detailed                    CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein RNA binding domain reveals poten-
functional studies of this essential protein.                                   tial unique drug targeting sites. Acta Pharm Sin B. https://d​ oi.o​ rg/​
                                                                                10.​1016/j.​apsb.​2020.​04.​009
Acknowledgements This work used the platforms of the Grenoble              Keane SC, Giedroc DP (2013) Solution structure of mouse Hepati-
Instruct-ERIC center (ISBG; UMS 3518 CNRS-CEA-UGA-EMBL)                         tis Virus (MHV) nsp3a and determinants of the interaction with
within the Grenoble Partnership for Structural Biology (PSB), sup-              MHV nucleocapsid (N) protein. J Virol 87:3502–3515
ported by FRISBI (ANR-10-INBS-05-02) and GRAL, financed within             Lakomek N-A, Ying J, Bax A (2012) Measurement of 15N relaxa-
the University Grenoble Alpes graduate school (Ecoles Universitaires            tion rates in perdeuterated proteins by TROSY-based meth-
de Recherche) CBH-EUR-GS (ANR-17-EURE-0003). IBS acknowl-                       ods. J Biomol NMR 53:209–221. https:// ​ d oi. ​ o rg/ ​ 1 0. ​ 1 007/​
edges integration into the Interdisciplinary Research Institute of Gre-         s10858-​012-​9626-5
noble (IRIG CEA). IBS acknowledges integration into the Interdis-          Lee W, Tonelli M, Markley JL (2015) NMRFAM-SPARKY: enhanced
ciplinary Research Institute of Grenoble (IRIG CEA). The authors                software for biomolecular NMR spectroscopy. Bioinformatics
acknowledge discussions and encouragement from the COVID-19                     31:1325–1327. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bioin​forma​tics/​btu830
NMR consortium under the coordination of Prof. Harald Schwalbe             Lescop E, Schanda P, Brutscher B (2007) A set of BEST triple-
and colleagues. Financial support from the TGIR-RMN-THC Fr3050                  resonance experiments for time-optimized protein resonance
CNRS for conducting the research is gratefully acknowledged.                    assignment. J Magn Reson 187:163–169. https://​d oi.​o rg/​1 0.​
                                                                                1016/j.​jmr.​2007.​04.​002
                                                                           Lo Y-S, Lin S-Y, Wang S-M et al (2013) Oligomerization of the car-
                                                                                boxyl terminal domain of the human coronavirus 229E nucle-
                                                                                ocapsid protein. FEBS Lett 587:120–127. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
References                                                                      1016/j.​febsl​et.​2012.​11.​016
                                                                           Lu S, Ye Q, Singh D et al (2020) The SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid
Adamski W, Salvi N, Maurin D et al (2019) A unified description                 phosphoprotein forms mutually exclusive condensates with
     of intrinsically disordered protein dynamics under physiological           RNA and the membrane-associated M protein. Bio Rxiv. https://​
     conditions using NMR spectroscopy. J Am Chem Soc 141:17817–                doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​07.​30.​228023
     17829. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1021/​jacs.​9b090​02                    Lutomski CA, El-Baba TJ, Bolla JR, Robinson CV (2020) Autopro-
Carlson CR, Asfaha JB, Ghent CM et al (2020) Phosphorylation modu-              teolytic products of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein are
     lates liquid-liquid phase separation of the SARS-CoV-2 N protein.          primed for antibody evasion and virus proliferation. Bio Rxiv.
     Bio Rxiv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​06.​28.​176248                https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​10.​06.​328112
Chang C-K, Hsu Y-L, Chang Y-H et al (2009) Multiple nucleic acid           McBride R, van Zyl M, Fielding BC (2014) The coronavirus nucle-
     binding sites and intrinsic disorder of severe acute respiratory           ocapsid is a multifunctional protein. Viruses 6:2991–3018.
     syndrome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein: implications for ribo-          https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​v6082​991
     nucleocapsid protein packaging. J Virol 83:2255–2264. https://​       Nikolic J, Le Bars R, Lama Z et al (2017) Negri bodies are viral fac-
     doi.​org/​10.​1128/​JVI.​02001-​08                                         tories with properties of liquid organelles. Nat Commun 8:58.
Chang C, Hou M-H, Chang C-F et al (2014) The SARS coronavirus                   https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41467-​017-​00102-9
     nucleocapsid protein—forms and functions. Antivir Res 103:39–         Peng T-Y, Lee K-R, Tarn W-Y (2008) Phosphorylation of the arginine/
     50. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​antiv​iral.​2013.​12.​009               serine dipeptide-rich motif of the severe acute respiratory syn-
Chen H, Cui Y, Han X et al (2020) Liquid–liquid phase separation by             drome coronavirus nucleocapsid protein modulates its multim-
     SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein and RNA. Cell Res 30:1143–                 erization, translation inhibitory activity and cellular localization.
     1145. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41422-​020-​00408-2                    FEBS J 275:4152–4163. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1742-​4658.​
Cubuk J, Alston JJ, Incicco JJ et al (2020) The SARS-CoV-2 nucle-               2008.​06564.x
     ocapsid protein is dynamic, disordered, and phase separates with      Peng Y, Du N, Lei Y et al (2020) Structures of the SARS-CoV-2
     RNA. Bio Rxiv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​06.​17.​158121           nucleocapsid and their perspectives for drug design. EMBO J
Delaglio FD, Grzesiek S, Vuister G et al (1995) NMRPIPE–A mul-                  39(20):e105938. https://​doi.​org/​10.​15252/​embj.​20201​05938
     tidimensional spectral processing system based on unix pipes. J       Perdikari TM, Murthy AC, Ryan VH et al (2020) SARS-CoV-2 nucle-
     biomol nmr 6:277–293                                                       ocapsid protein undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation stimu-
Dinesh DC, Chalupska D, Silhan J et al (2020) Structural basis of RNA           lated by RNA and partitions into phases of human ribonucleopro-
     recognition by the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid phosphoprotein.                 teins. Bio Rxiv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​06.​09.​141101
     Bio Rxiv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​04.​02.​022194           Ringel M, Heiner A, Behner L et al (2019) Nipah virus induces two
Guseva S, Milles S, Jensen MR et al (2020) Measles virus nucleo- and            inclusion body populations: Identification of novel inclusions at
     phosphoproteins form liquid-like phase-separated compartments              the plasma membrane. PLoS Pathog 15:e1007733. https://d​ oi.o​ rg/​
                                                                                10.​1371/​journ​al.​ppat.​10077​33



                                                                                                                                           13


                                                                                                                                      S. Guseva et al.

Savastano A, de Opakua AI, Rankovic M, Zweckstetter M (2020)                  Zeng W, Liu G, Ma H et al (2020) Biochemical characterization of
    Nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV-2 phase separates into RNA-                  SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein. Biochem Biophys Res Com-
    rich polymerase-containing condensates. Bio Rxiv. https://d​ oi.o​ rg/​       mun 527:618–623. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​bbrc.​2020.​04.​136
    10.​1101/​2020.​06.​18.​160648                                            Zhou Y, Su JM, Samuel CE, Ma D (2019) Measles virus forms inclu-
Skinner SP, Fogh RH, Boucher W et al (2016) CcpNmr analysis assign:               sion bodies with properties of liquid organelles. J Virol. https://​
    a flexible platform for integrated NMR analysis. J Biomol NMR                 doi.​org/​10.​1128/​JVI.​00948-​19
    66:111–124. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10858-​016-​0060-y              Zúñiga S, Sola I, Moreno JL et al (2007) Coronavirus nucleocapsid
Solyom Z, Schwarten M, Geist L et al (2013) BEST-TROSY experi-                    protein is an RNA chaperone. Virology 357:215–227. https://d​ oi.​
    ments for time-efficient sequential resonance assignment of large             org/​10.​1016/j.​virol.​2006.​07.​046
    disordered proteins. J Biomol NMR 55:311–321. https://​doi.​org/​
    10.​1007/​s10858-​013-​9715-0                                             Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
Wu C-H, Chen P-J, Yeh S-H (2014) Nucleocapsid phosphorylation and             jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
    RNA helicase DDX1 recruitment enables coronavirus transition
    from discontinuous to continuous transcription. Cell Host Microbe
    16:462–472. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chom.​2014.​09.​009
Ye Q, West AMV, Silletti S, Corbett KD (2020) Architecture and self-
    assembly of the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein. Bio Rxiv.
    https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​05.​17.​100685




13




"Multi-scale studies of Measles virus nu-
cleocapsid assembly"

Résumé
La séparation de phases liquide-liquide est un phénomène crucial dans toute la bio-
logie, impliqué dans de multiples processus cellulaires et responsable de la forma-
tion d’organelles sans membrane qui sont essentielles pour l’organisation spatiale
et temporelle intracellulaire. Il a été proposé que de tels organites soient impliqués
dans la formation des usines de réplication virale, qui résultent de l’infection par un
certain nombre de virus à ARN simple brin négatif.
Ici, nous étudions la séparation de phase de la machinerie de réplication de la rou-
geole in vitro, nous identifions la nature et la localisation des interactions requises
et montrons que certains processus essentiels sont accélérés, en particulier l’as-
semblage de la nucléocapside où la nucléoprotéine de la rougeole se lie à l’ARN
génomique pour former des capsides hélicoïdales.
Les protéines impliquées dans la réplication de la rougeole sont connues pour être
phosphorylées dans la cellule, cependant, le rôle fonctionnel de cette modification
post-traductionnelle n’était pas compris auparavant. Au cours de ma thèse, nous
avons découvert que la phosphorylation de la phosphoprotéine de la rougeole dé-
clenche l’assemblage de la nucléocapside.
Pour mieux comprendre l’origine physique de la séparation de phase des protéines,
nous avons étudié la structure et la dynamique des protéines en utilisant un système
modèle. En utilisant une partie désordonnée de la nucléoprotéine de la rougeole,
nous comparons le comportement de la protéine entre les états dilué et condensé.
En utilisant la spectroscopie RMN, nous effectuons une comparaison spécifique au
site des amplitudes de mouvement et des échelles de temps de la protéine entre
les phases.
Enfin, il a également été démontré que le SARS-COV-2 forme des condensats vi-
raux ne nécessitant qu’une seule protéine virale : la nucléoprotéine. Nous caracté-
risons ici les régions intrinsèquement désordonnées du SARS-COV-2 N et démon-
trons sa séparation de phase in vitro.

Mots-clés :         Séparation de phases liquide-liquide, RMN, rougeole, usines
virales, dynamique des protéines, SARS-COV-2



Abstract
Liquid-liquid phase separation is a crucial phenomenon throughout biology involved
in multiple cellular processes and responsible for forming membraneless organelles
that are essential for the intracellular spatial and temporal organisation. Such orga-
nelles have been proposed to be involved in the formation of so-called viral replica-
tion factories, which result from infection by a number of negative single-strand RNA
viruses.
Here, we study measles replication machinery phase separation in vitro, we identify
the nature and location of the required interactions and show that certain essential
processes are accelerated, in particular nucleocapsid assembly where the measles
nucleoprotein binds to the genomic RNA to form helical capsids. Proteins involved
in measles replication are known to be phosphorylated in the cell, however, the
functional role of this post-translational modification was not previously understood.
During my thesis we discovered that phosphorylation of measles phosphoprotein
triggers nucleocapsid assembly.
To better understand the physical origin of protein phase separation, we studied
protein structure and dynamics using a model system. Using a disordered part of
measles nucleoprotein, we compare protein behaviour between dilute and conden-
sed states. Using NMR spectroscopy, we perform a site-specific comparison of mo-
tional amplitudes and timescales of the protein between phases.
Finally, SARS-COV-2 has also been shown to form viral condensates requiring only
one viral protein: the nucleoprotein. Here, we characterise the intrinsically disorde-
red regions of SARS-COV-2 N and demonstrate its phase separation in vitro.

Keywords : Liquid-liquid phase separation, NMR, measles, viral factories,
protein dynamics, SARS-COV-2
